

The symbols of Honour and Glory and Time that looked so handsome in the
flooding sunlight of the _Titanic's_ stairway lie crushed into
unrecognizable shapes and splinters beneath the tonnage of two thousand
fathoms of ocean water. Time is no more for the fifteen hundred souls
who perished with them; but Honour and Glory, by strange ways and
unlooked-for events, have come into their own. It was not Time, nor the
creatures and things of Time, that received their final crown there; but
things that have nothing to do with Time, qualities that, in their power
of rising beyond all human limitations, we must needs call divine.

The _Titanic_ was in more senses than one a fool's paradise. There is
nothing that man can build that nature cannot destroy, and far as he may
advance in might and knowledge and cunning, her blind strength will
always be more than his match. But men easily forget this; they wish to
forget it; and the beautiful and comfortable and agreeable equipment of
this ship helped them to forget it. You may cover the walls of a ship
with rare woods and upholster them with tapestries and brocades, but it
is the bare steel walls behind them on which you depend to keep out the
water; it is the strength of those walls, relatively to the strength of
such natural forces as may be arrayed against them, on which the safety
of the ship depends. If they are weaker than something which assails
them, the water must come in and the ship must sink. It was assumed too
readily that, in the case of the _Titanic_, these things could not
happen; it was assumed too readily that if in the extreme event they did
happen, the manifold appliances for saving life would be amply
sufficient for the security of the passengers. Thus they lived in a
serene confidence such as no ship's company ever enjoyed before, or will
enjoy again for a long time to come. And there were gathered about them
almost all those accessories of material life which are necessary to the
paradise of fools, and are extremely agreeable to wiser men.

It was this perfect serenity of their condition which made so poignant
the tragedy of their sudden meeting with death--that pale angel whom
every man knows that he must some day encounter, but whom most of us
hope to find at the end of some road a very long way off waiting for us
with comforting and soothing hands. We do not expect to meet him
suddenly turning the corner of the street, or in an environment of
refined and elegant conviviality, or in the midst of our noonday
activities, or at midnight on the high seas when we are dreaming on
feather pillows. But it was thus that those on the _Titanic_ encountered
him, waiting there in the ice and the starlight, arresting the ship's
progress with his out-stretched arm, and standing by, waiting, while the
sense of his cold presence gradually sank like a frost into their
hearts.

To say that all the men who died on the _Titanic_ were heroes would be
as absurd as to say that all who were saved were cowards. There were
heroes among both groups and cowards among both groups, as there must be
among any large number of men. It is the collective behaviour and the
general attitude towards disaster that is important at such a time; and
in this respect there is ample evidence that death scored no advantage
in the encounter, and that, though he took a spoil of bodies that had
been destined for him since the moment of their birth, he left the
hearts unconquered. In that last half-hour before the end, when every
one on the ship was under sentence of death, modern civilization went
through a severe test. By their bearing in that moment those fated men
and women had to determine whether, through the long years of peace and
increase of material comfort and withdrawal from contact with the cruder
elements of life, their race had deteriorated in courage and morale. It
is only by such great tests that we can determine how we stand in these
matters, and, as they periodically recur, measure our advance or
decline. And the human material there made the test a very severe one;
for there were people on the _Titanic_ who had so entrenched themselves
behind ramparts of wealth and influence as to have wellnigh forgotten
that, equally with the waif and the pauper, they were exposed to the
caprice of destiny; and who might have been forgiven if, in that awful
moment of realization, they had shown the white feather and given
themselves over to panic. But there is ample evidence that these men
stood the test equally as well as those whose occupation and training
made them familiar with the risks of the sea, to which they were
continually exposed, and through which they might reasonably expect to
come to just such an end. There was no theatrical heroism, no striking
of attitudes, or attempt to escape from the dread reality in any form of
spiritual hypnosis; they simply stood about the decks, smoking
cigarettes, talking to one another, and waiting for their hour to
strike. There is nothing so hard, nothing so entirely dignified, as to
be silent and quiet in the face of an approaching horror.

That was one form of heroism, which will make the influence of this
thing deathless long after the memory of it has faded as completely from
the minds of men as sight or sign of it has faded from that area of
ocean where, two miles above the sunken ship, the rolling blue furrows
have smoothed away all trace of the struggles and agonies that
embittered it. But there was another heroism which must be regarded as
the final crown and glory of this catastrophe--not because it is
exceptional, for happily it is not, but because it continued and
confirmed a tradition of English sea life that should be a tingling
inspiration to everyone who has knowledge of it. The men who did the
work of the ship were no composite, highly drilled body like the men in
the navy who, isolated for months at a time and austerely disciplined,
are educated into an _esprit de corps_ and sense of responsibility that
make them willing, in moments of emergency, to sacrifice individual
safety to the honour of the ship and of the Service to which they
belong. These stokers, stewards, and seamen were the ordinary scratch
crew, signed on at Southampton for one round trip to New York and back;
most of them had never seen each other or their officers before; they
had none of the training or the securities afforded by a great national
service; they were simply--especially in the case of the stokers--men so
low in the community that they were able to live no pleasanter life than
that afforded by the stokehold of a ship--an inferno of darkness and
noise and commotion and insufferable heat--men whose experience of the
good things of life was half an hour's breathing of the open sea air
between their spells of labour at the furnaces, or a drunken spree
ashore whence, after being poisoned by cheap drink and robbed by joyless
women of the fruits of their spell of labour, they are obliged to return
to it again to find the means for another debauch. Not the stuff out of
which one would expect an austere heroism to be evolved. Yet such are
the traditions of the sea, such is the power of those traditions and the
spirit of those who interpret them, that some of these men--not all, but
some--remained down in the _Titanic's_ stokeholds long after she had
struck, and long after the water, pouring like a cataract through the
rent in her bottom and rising like a tide round the black holes where
they worked, had warned them that her doom, and probably theirs, was
sealed.

In the engine-room were another group of heroes, men of a far higher
type, with fine intelligences, trained in all the subtleties and craft
of modern ships, men with education and imagination who could see in
their mind's eye all the variations of horror that might await them.
These men also continued at their routine tasks in the engine room,
knowing perfectly well that no power on earth could save them, choosing
to stay there while there was work to be done for the common good, their
best hope being presently to be drowned instead of being boiled or
scalded to death. All through the ship, though in less awful
circumstances, the same spirit was being observed; men who had duties to
do went on doing them because they were the kind of men to whom in such
an hour it came more easily to perform than to shirk their duties. The
three ship's boys spent the whole of that hour carrying provisions from
the store-room to the deck; the post-office employes worked in the
flooded mail-room below to save the mail-bags and carry them up to where
they might be taken off if there should be a chance; the purser and his
men brought up the ship's books and money, against all possibility of
its being any use to do so, but because it was their duty at such a time
to do so; the stewards were busy to the end with their domestic, and the
officers with their executive, duties. In all this we have an example of
spontaneous discipline--for they had never been drilled in doing these
things, they only knew that they had to do them--such as no barrack-room
discipline in the world could match. In such moments all artificial
bonds are useless. It is what men are in themselves that determines
their conduct; and discipline and conduct like this are proofs, not of
the superiority of one race over another, but that in the core of human
nature itself there is an abiding sweetness and soundness that fear
cannot embitter nor death corrupt.

       *       *       *       *       *

The twin gray horses are still at their work in Belfast Lough, and on
any summer morning you may see their white manes shining like gold as
they escort you in from the sunrise and the open sea to where the smoke
rises and the din resounds.

For the iron forest has branched again, and its dreadful groves are
echoing anew to the clamour of the hammers and the drills. Another ship,
greater and stronger even than the lost one, is rising within the
cathedral scaffoldings; and the men who build her, companions of those
whom the _Titanic_ spilled into the sea, speak among themselves and say,
"this time we shall prevail."

_May 1912._




A TABLE

SHOWING THE LOSS OF LIFE ON THE _TITANIC_


                  FIRST CLASS
                                         Per cent.
                Carried.  Saved.  Lost.     saved.

  Men              173       58    115         34
  Women            144      139      5         97
  Children           5        5      0        100
                   ---      ---    ---        ---
    Total          322      202    120         63


                  SECOND CLASS
                                         Per cent.
                Carried.  Saved.  Lost.     saved.

  Men              160      13     147          8
  Women             93      78      15         84
  Children          24      24       0        100
                   ---     ---     ---        ---
    Total          277     115     162         42


                  THIRD CLASS
                                         Per cent.
                Carried.  Saved.  Lost.     saved.

  Men            454      55     399          12
  Women          179      98      81          55
  Children        76      23      53          30
                 ---     ---     ---         ---
    Total        709     176     533          25

                  TOTAL PASSENGERS
                                         Per cent.
                Carried.  Saved.  Lost.     saved.

  Men              787     126    661        16
  Women            416     315    101        76
  Children         105      52     53        49
                  ----     ---    ---       ---
    Total         1308     493    815        38


                      CREW

                                         Per cent.
                Carried.  Saved.  Lost.     saved.

  Men              875     189    686        22
  Women             23      21      2        91
                   ---     ---    ---       ---
    Total          898     210    688        23


              TOTAL PASSENGERS AND CREW
                                         Per cent.
                Carried.   Saved. Lost.     saved.

  Men              1662     315   1347        19
  Women             439     336    103        77
  Children          105      52     53        49
                   ----     ---   ----       ---
    Total          2206     703   1503        32




  CHISWICK PRESS: PRINTED BY CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
  TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.




BY THE SAME AUTHOR

CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS AND THE NEW WORLD OF HIS DISCOVERY.

With Frontispiece in colour by Norman Wilkinson. Portrait, Maps,
Illustrations, Appendices and a Note on the Navigation of Columbus's
First Voyage by the Earl of Dunraven, K.P. Large Post 8vo, cloth, gilt.
7_s._ 6_d._ net. (Third Edition.)

Mr. Henry Vignaud, late Secretary of the American Embassy and
distinguished historian of Columbus, says:

"_In this book the hero who discovered the New World is shown for the
first time as a living man.... A more true and lively picture of the
great discoverer than is contained in any other work._"

"Mr. Filson Young has done nothing better ... there is not a dull page
in the seven hundred. His descriptions of visible things, of streets and
hills, and seas and men, are vivid in his accustomed manner. His
narrative is rich and marching, yet sufficiently precise.... For the
modern taste there is really nothing about Columbus to compare with Mr.
Young's for matter and style."--_The Morning Post._

"If these volumes do not bring the figure of Columbus into closer
relation with the mind of the present generation, it must be because
people simply do not care to learn about anything that lies a few yards
beyond their own thresholds. Our hope, however, is better; and we
imagine that there will be a wide public for a narrative so fresh and
spirited.

"Mr. Filson Young tells his story, without turning to the right hand or
to the left, in a free and fluent fashion.... Very vigorous too are the
passages dealing with his voyages, for Mr. Filson Young has drunk deep
of the spirit of the sea and nowhere writes so well as in his account of
the seafarer's business in great waters.... The book abounds in
interludes of suggestive thought and clear, vigorous expression. But,
the book must be commended for the keen, eager spirit of its narrative
and the abounding interest of its romances. If all gleaners in the field
of history were as skilful as Mr. Young, we should not hear so much
about the dry-as-dust dullness of what ought to be always one of the
most fascinating forms of literary art."

Mr. W. L. Courtney in _The Daily Telegraph_.

"Mr. Young has given us an estimate of the man which is attractive and
poetical. His account of the four voyages to the Indies is a romance of
the sea.... His book is a book of colour and the spirit of adventure. We
delight in that vision of his which shows to others the world and the
sea and the strange 'Indias' very much as Columbus saw them, with his
keen eyes, four centuries ago."--_The Manchester Guardian._

"History clothed with a gracious humanity ... history that has reality
and life ... not a mere record of his acts, but a reconstruction of the
man who died four centuries ago, so that at the end of the book we feel
that we have known and spoken with Columbus.... Breathes interest from
every page."--_The Daily Chronicle._

"He writes with charm, with colour, and with humour ... very readable
and eloquent.... We can give but a little quotation to show Mr. Young's
eloquence, but we can assure the reader that he has many passages that
set one longing for the sea."--Mr. John Masefield in _The Tribune._

"It is almost impossible to do justice to the splendour and romance of
these two finely produced volumes.... 'Charity, truth, and justice,'
that is the meed Columbus has from Mr. Filson Young, whose book--austere,
dignified, stately--forms by far the most striking and vivid portrait of
the hero in our language."--_The Morning Leader._

"To write a new book on Columbus seems a daring project; so many folios
have already been dedicated to his life. Mr. Young has justified
himself; so many books on the Genoese sailor have been either
unexpectedly dull or painfully inaccurate. Mr. Young is neither; in a
style pleasant and lucid he has set before us with vigour the period and
the setting of these famous voyages. In his pages we can enter into the
feelings and aspirations of those Western seamen."--_The Pall Mall
Gazette._

GRANT RICHARDS, LTD. 7, CARLTON ST. LONDON, S.W.




                   THE GRANT RICHARDS BOOKS
                  BEING A COMPLETE CATALOGUE
                   OF THE BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
                     GRANT RICHARDS, LTD.
                       7 CARLTON STREET
                         LONDON, S.W.
                             1912


7 Carlton Street, London, S.W.

=Ade, George.=

-- In Pastures New. Illustrated. 6s.

=Androutsos, Chrestos.=

-- The Validity of English Ordinations. Translated and Edited by F. W.
Groves Campbell, LL.D. Crown 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d. net.

=AEschylus.=

-- The Agamemnon of AEschylus. Translated by Arthur Platt, M.A. Fcap. 8vo.
cloth, 2s. 6_d._ net.

=AEsop.=

-- AEsop's Fables. With many illustrations in colour and in black and
white by J. M. Conde. Medium 8vo. cloth, 5s. net.

=Aflalo F. G.=

-- The Call of the Sea: A Prose Anthology. With End-papers in colour by
William Hyde. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth gilt, 4s. net. Persian yapp, in box, 5s.
net.

=Aix.=

-- The Adventures of a Nice Young Man. 6s.

=Allen, Grant.=

-- Evolution in Italian Art. With an introduction by J. W. Cruickshank.
Illustrated. Pott 4to. cloth gilt, 10s. 6d. net.

-- Grant Allen's Historical Guides. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth. Each 3s. 6d. net.
      Paris. By Grant Allen. Illustrated. [_Fifth Edition._
      Florence. By Grant Allen. Illustrated. [_Fifth Edition._
      Cities of Belgium. By Grant Allen. [_Third Edition._
      Venice. By Grant Allen. Illustrated. [_Fourth Edition._
      Cities of Northern Italy. By G. C. Williamson, D.L. [_Second
          Edition._
      The Umbrian Towns. By J. W. Cruickshank.
      Classical Rome. By H. Stuart Jones.
      Christian Rome. By J. W. Cruickshank. Illustrated. [_Second
          Edition._
      Smaller Tuscan Towns. By J. W. Cruickshank. [_In preparation._

-- The Woman Who Did. New edition. With frontispiece by Frank Haviland.
3s. 6d.

=Anon.=

-- A Babe Unborn. 6s.

=Anonymous.=

-- The Future Prime Minister. 2s. 6d. net.

=Applin, Arthur.=

-- The Children of the Gutter. 6s.

-- The Butcher of Bruton Street. With frontispiece in colour by Frank
Haviland. 6s.

=Aristophanes.=--_See under_ Richards, Herbert, M.A.

=Atkey, Bertram.=

-- Easy Money. With 36 Illustrations by G. L. Stampa. 6s.

-- Folk of the Wild: A Book of the Forests, the Moors and the Mountains,
of the Beasts of the Silent Places, their Lives, their Doings and their
Deaths. With 31 Illustrations by Harry Rountree. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 6s.
[_Out of print._

=Ault, Lena and Norman.=

-- The Podgy Book of Tales. With 16 Illustrations in Colour and over 100
in black and white. Demy 16mo. Cloth. 2s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Barrington, Rutland.=

-- Rutland Barrington: a Record of Thirty-five Years on the Stage.
Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

-- More Rutland Barrington. Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s.
6d. net.

=Barzini, Luigi.=

-- Pekin to Paris: An Account of Prince Borghese's Journey across two
Continents in a Motor Car. With an Introduction by Prince Borghese.
Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 16s. net.

=Bates, Katherine L.=

-- From Gretna Green to Land's End. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt.
7s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Bax, Ernest Belfort.=

-- The Last Episode of the French Revolution: Being a History of Gracchus
Babeuf and the Conspiracy of the Equals. With Portrait. Cloth. Large
post 8vo. 5s. net.

-- The Roots of Reality: Being Suggestions for a Philosophical
Reconstruction. Large post 8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out of
print._

-- Essays in Socialism. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net. People's Edition
with additional Essays. With cover design by Walter Crane. Demy 8vo.
Sewed. 6d.

=Baxter, Richard.=

-- The Saints' Everlasting Rest. Edited by the Rev. William Young. With
portrait. Large post 8vo. Half-leather. 7s. 6d. net.

=Bedford, F. D.=

-- A Night of Wonders. Illustrated in Colours. Fcap. 8vo. oblong. 3s. 6d.
net.

=Bisgood, Mary.=

-- Powder and Jam. With 32 Illustrations in Colour. Crown 8vo. oblong.
Cloth. 2s. net.

=Blake, William.= _See under_ Venetian Series, The.

=Blyth, James.=

-- The Same Clay. 6s.--Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo. Sewed, 1s. net.

=Booth, Edward C.=

-- The Doctor's Lass. 6s. [_Second Edition._

-- The Cliff End. Illustrated. 6s. [_Fourth Edition._

=Braithwaite, W. S.=

-- The Book of Georgian Verse. 1300 pages. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth gilt. 6s.
net.

=Browne, Sir Thomas.=

-- Religio Medici, Urn Burial and an Essay on Dreams. With Frontispiece.
Pott 8vo. Leather gilt, 3s. net. Cloth gilt, 2s. net.

=Bruce, H. Addington.=

-- The Riddle of Personality. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net.

=Burgess, Gelett.=

-- The Heart Line. Illustrated. 6s.

=Burland, Harris.=

-- The Broken Law. Illustrated. 6s.

-- The Black Motor Car. Illustrated. 6s.

=Burroughs, D.=

-- Jack the Giant-killer, Junior. With 11 Illustrations. Fcap. 4to.
Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

=Cain, Georges.=

-- Nooks and Corners of Old Paris. Translated by Frederick Lawton.
Illustrated. Crown 4to. Cloth gilt. 10s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Caldbeck, Major Roper.=

-- The Nation and the Army. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 2s. 6_d._ net.

=Campbell, F. W. Groves.=

-- Apollonius of Tyana. With an Introduction by Ernest Oldmeadow. Crown
8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

-- _See also under_ Androutsos, Chrestos.

=Carmichael, Philip.=

-- The Man from the Moon. With 8 Illustrations in Colour and many in
Black-and-White by Frank Watkins. Pott 4to. Cloth. 6s.

=Casson, Herbert N.=

-- The Romance of Steel: The Story of a Thousand Millionaires.
Illustrated. Medium 8vo. Cloth gilt. 10s. 6_d._ net.

=Castle, Tudor Ralph.=

-- The Gentle Shepherd. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Cawein, Madison.=

-- New Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Half parchment. 5s. net.

=CHAPBOOKS, THE.= Royal 32mo. Lambskin gilt, each 2s. 6d. net.
        I. Lyrists of the Restoration.
       II. Essays Moral and Polite.
      III. The Poems of Herrick.
       IV. Lyrics of Ben Jonson, and Beaumont & Fletcher.

=Chatterton, Thomas.= _See under_ Russell, Charles Edward.

=Chaucer, Geoffrey.=

-- The Canterbury Tales. Told by Percy Mackaye. With Illustrations in
Colour by W. Appleton Clark. Fcap. 4to. Cloth gilt. 5s. net. [_Out of
print._

=Chester, George Randolph.=

-- Get-Rich-Quick Wallingford. 6s.

=Coleridge, Samuel Taylor.= _See under_ Venetian Series, The.

=Consule Planco=: Being Reflections of an Etonian of that Period. Fcap.
8vo. cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

=Copping, Arthur E.=

-- Gotty and the Guv'nor: A True Narrative of Gotty's Doings Ashore and
Afloat, with an Account of his Voyage of Discovery on a Shrimping Bawley
in the English Channel. With 24 Illustrations by Will Owen. 6s. [_Out of
print._

=Cornford, L. Cope.=

-- Parson Brand. 6s.

-- The Canker at the Heart: Being Studies in the Life of the Poor in the
Year of Grace 1905. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

-- The Defenceless Islands: A Study of the Social and Industrial
Conditions of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the Effect upon them of
an Outbreak of a Maritime War. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

=Cottingham, H.=

-- Business Success. Royal 16mo. Cloth, 1s. net. Sewed, 6d. net

=Cruickshank, J. W.= _See under_ Allen, Grant, Historical
Guides.

=Curties, Henry.=

-- Renee. 6s.

=Dampier, Captain William.=

-- The Voyages of Captain William Dampier. Edited by John Masefield.
Illustrated. Two volumes. Demy 8vo. 25s. net. Limited to 1000 copies.
[_Out of print._

=Danrit, Captain.=

-- The Sunken Submarine. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 5s. [_In
preparation._

=Davidson, John.=

-- The Testament of John Davidson. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

-- Fleet Street and other Poems. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 5s. net.

-- Mammon and his Message. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net.

-- The Triumph of Mammon. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net.

-- The Theatrocrat: A Tragic Play of Church and Stage. Crown 8vo. Cloth
gilt. 5s. net.

-- Holiday and Other Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Buckram gilt. 3s. 6d. net.

=Davis, Colonel Newnham.=

-- The Gourmet's Guide to Europe. Third Edition, revised. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth. 5s. net.

-- The Gourmet's Guide to London. [_In preparation._

=Dawson, A. J.=

-- The Message. 6s.--Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo. Sewed 1s. net. [_Fourth
Edition._

-- The Genteel A. B. With 4 Illustrations in Colour by W. Ralston. 6s.
[_Second Edition._

-- Finn the Wolfhound. With 16 full-page and 36 other Illustrations by R.
H. Buxton. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 6s. net. [_Second Edition._

=Dawson, Mrs. Frederick.= -- The Upper Hand. 6s.

=Delacombe, Harry.=

-- The Boys' Book of Airships. Fully Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth.
6s.

=De Windt, Harry.=

-- My Restless Life. Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth, gilt. 7s. 6d.
net.

=Dole, Nathan Haskell.=

-- The Russian Fairy Book. With Illustrations in Colour. Medium 8vo.
Cloth. 3s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Douglas, James.=

-- The Unpardonable Sin. With Frontispiece in Colour by Frank Haviland.
6s. Cheap Edition, cloth, 1s. net.

=Duncan, Stanley.=

-- The Complete Wild-fowler Ashore and Afloat. Illustrated. Royal 8vo.
Cloth gilt. 15s. net.

=Durand, R. A.=

-- Oxford: its Buildings and Gardens. With 32 Reproductions from Drawings
in Colour by W. A. Wildman. Large post 4to. Cloth gilt. 21s. net Edition
de luxe, limited to 100 copies, 42s. net.

=Duret, Theodore.=

-- Manet and the French Impressionists. Translated by J. E. Crawford
Flitch, M.A. Illustrated with Etchings and Wood Engravings, and with 32
Reproductions in half-tone. Crown 4to. Cloth gilt. 12s. 6d. net.

=ELIZABETHAN CLASSICS, THE.=

-- The Essayes of Michael Lord of Montaigne. The Famous Flowered
Contemporary Version of John Florio. With an Introduction by Thomas
Seccombe. Edition limited to 1150 numbered copies for sale in England
and America. With Portraits. 3 vols. Extra demy 8vo. Buckram gilt. 31s.
6d. net.

=Enock, C. Reginald, F.R.G.S.=

-- The Great Pacific Coast. With 64 Illustrations and a Map. Demy 8vo.
Cloth gilt. 16s. net.

-- An Imperial Commonwealth. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

=Flitch, J. E. Crawford, M.A.=

-- Mediterranean Moods: Footnotes of Travel in the Islands of Mallorca,
Menorca, Ibiza, and Sardinia. With Frontispiece in Colour and 32
Illustrations in black and white. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 12s. 6d. net.

=Fyfe, H. C.=

-- Submarine Warfare: Past, Present, and Future. Illustrated. Second
Edition. Revised by John Leyland. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net.

=Galsworthy, John.=

-- A Commentary. 3s. 6d.

=Garvey, Ina.=

-- A Comedy of Mammon. 6s.

=Gibbs, Philip.=

-- The Individualist. 6s.

=Godfrey, Elizabeth.=

-- Heidelberg: Its Princes and Its Palaces. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth
gilt. 12s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Godfrey-Faussett, Mabel.=

-- The Dual Heritage. 6s.

=GRANT RICHARDS'S NURSERY LIBRARY.=
      I. Peter Pixie. By A. Thorburn. Illustrated. Fcap. 16mo. Cloth.
          1s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Gretton, R. H.=

-- Ingram. 6s.

=Grimm.=

-- Grimm's Fairy Tales. Selected and retold by Githa Sowerby. With twelve
Illustrations in Colour, and many in black and white, by Millicent
Sowerby. Royal 8vo. Cloth gilt. 6s. net.

=Hamilton, Clayton.=

-- The Theory of the Theatre. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 5s. net.

-- Materials and Methods of Fiction. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net.

=Hart, George Henry.=--_See under_ Temple of Fame Series.

=Hart, W. C.=

-- Confessions of an Anarchist. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 2s. 6d.
net. Cheap Edition, cloth, 1s. net.

=Hawker, C. E.=

-- Chats about Wine. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

=Henland, Cecil.=

-- The Christmas Book: Lest We Forget. Fcap. 8vo. oblong. Cloth, 1s. net.
Leather, 2s. net.

=Henshall, James A.=

-- Favourite Fish and Fishing. With 37 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
3s. 6d. net.

=Her Brother's Letters.= Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth 3s. 6d. net.

=Hodder, Reginald.= _See under_ Turner, Edgar.

=Housman, A. E.=

-- D. Junii Juvenalis Saturae. Demy 8vo. Paper boards. 4s. 6d. net.

-- M. Manilii Astronomicon I. Demy 8vo. Paper boards. 4s. 6d. net.

-- A Shropshire Lad. New edition. With 8 Illustrations in Colour by
William Hyde. Large post 8vo. Buckram gilt, 6s. net. Persian yapp, gilt,
7s. 6d. net. Limited Edition on Arnold hand-made paper. Fcap. 8vo. cloth
gilt, 2s. 6d. net. Also in royal 32mo. Persian yapp, 1s. 6d. net.
Leather, 1s. net. Cloth, 6d. net.

=Howden, J. R.=

-- The Boys' Book of Railways. Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 6s.

-- The Boys' Book of Steamships. Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 6s.
[_Second Edition._

-- The Boys' Book of Locomotives. Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 6s.
[_Second Edition._

-- The Boys' Book of Warships. Illustrated. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 6s.
[_In preparation._

=Hudson, C. B.=

-- The Crimson Conquest. 6s.

=Hume, Major Martin.=

-- Queens of Old Spain. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 15s. net.

-- Through Portugal. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

=Ibsen.= _See under_ Macfall, Haldane.

=Irving, Washington.=

-- The Legend of Sleepy Hollow. With illustrations in colour by Arthur I.
Keller. Pott 4to. Cloth. 5s. net.

=Jackson, Holbrook.=

-- Romance and Reality: Essays and Studies. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d.
net.

-- Bernard Shaw. Illustrated. Small crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net. Cheap
edition, crown 8vo. sewed, 1s. net.

-- _See also under_ Temple of Fame Series.

=Jarrott, Charles.=

-- Ten Years of Motors and Motor Racing. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth
gilt. 12s. 6d. net.

=Job, Herbert R.=

-- The Sport of Bird Study. Illustrated. Fcap. 4to. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d.
net. [_Out of print._

=Jones, P. F.=

-- Shamrock Land. With 48 illustrations. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 10s. 6d.
net.

=Jones, Stuart H.=--_See under_ Allen, Grant, Historical Guides.

=Kephart, Horace.=

-- The Book of Camping and Woodcraft. Illustrated. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth gilt.
4s. net.

=Kerr, Joe.=

-- Mister Sharptooth. Illustrated in colour by R. H. Porteus. Crown 4to.
Cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

='Kottabos.'=

-- Echoes from Kottabos. Edited by R. Y. Tyrell, Litt.D., LL.D., and Sir
Edward Sullivan, Bart. Pott 4to. Half buckram gilt. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out
of print._

=Lawton, Frederick.=

-- The Third French Republic. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 12_s._
6_d._ net.

-- Balzac. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

-- _See also under_ Cain, Georges, and Masters of Art Series.

=Lawton, Lancelot.=

-- Empires of the Far East: A Study of Japan and its Possessions, of
China, Manchuria, and Korea, and of the Political Questions of Eastern
Asia and the Pacific. Two volumes. Demy 8vo. cloth gilt, with Maps.
24_s._ net. [_In preparation._

-- The Japanese Spy. With frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.

=Leblanc, Maurice.=

-- Arsene Lupin versus Holmlock Shears. Translated by A. Teixeira de
Mattos. 6_s._

=Lee, Gerald Stanley.=

-- Inspired Millionaires: A Story of the Professional Point of View in
Business. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

=Lee, Vernon.=--_See under_ Omar Series, The.

=Lefevre, Felicite.=

-- The Cock, the Mouse, and the Little Red Hen. With 24 full-page
pictures in colour by Tony Sarg. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 1s. 6d. net.
[_Out of print._

=Le Gallienne, Richard.=

-- Omar Repentant. Fcap. 8vo. oblong. 2s. net.

=Level, Maurice.=

-- The Grip of Fear. 6s.

=Leverson, Ada.=

-- The Limit. With frontispiece in colour. 6s. [_Second Edition._

-- Love's Shadow. With frontispiece in Colour. 6s.

-- The Twelfth Hour. With Frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.
[_Second Edition._

=Longfellow.=

-- The Courtship of Miles Standish. Illustrated in colours by H. C.
Christy. Fcap. 4to. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

-- Evangeline. Illustrated in colours by H. C. Christy. Fcap. 4to. Cloth
gilt. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

-- Hiawatha. With sixty-eight pictures in colour and in black-and-white
by Harrison Fisher. Fcap. 4to. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net.

=McCormick, Frederick.=

-- The Tragedy of Russia in Pacific Asia. With reproductions of drawings
by the author, photographs, and maps. Two volumes. Royal 8vo. Cloth
gilt. 21s. net.

=McCutcheon, G. B.=

-- Jane Cable. Illustrated. 6s. [_Out of print._

-- Nedra. 6s. [_Out of print._

=Macfall, Haldane.=

-- Ibsen: His Life, Art, and Significance. Illustrated by Joseph Simpson.
Imperial 16mo. 5s. net.

=Machen, Arthur.=

-- The Hill of Dreams. With frontispiece by S. H. Sime. 6s.

-- The House of Souls. With frontispiece by S. H. Sime. 6s.

=McLaren, Lady.=

-- The Women's Charter of Rights and Liberties. Crown 8vo. Paper covers.
6d. net.

=Malcolm, Ian.=

-- Indian Pictures and Problems. Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 10s.
6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Masefield, John.=

-- Multitude and Solitude. 6s.

-- Captain Margaret. 6s.

-- A Tarpaulin Muster. 3s. 6d. [_Out of print._

-- The Tragedy of Nan, &c. Large post 8vo. Paper boards. 3s. 6d. net.
Cheap Edition. Fcap. 8vo. sewed, 1s. 6d. net. [_Second Edition._

-- _See also under_ Dampier, Captain William.

=Mauzens, Frederic.=

-- The Living Strong Box. Illustrated. 6s.

=Mason, Stuart.= _See under_ Wilde, Oscar.

=Maxwell, Gerald.=

-- The Miracle Worker. With frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.
[_Out of print._

=Meredith, George.= _See under_ Hammerton, J. A.

=Moore, R. Hudson.=

-- Children of Other Days. Illustrated. Crown 4to. Cloth. 4s. 6d. net.
[_Out of print._

=Murray, Kate.=

-- The Blue Star. 6s.

=MASTERS OF ART SERIES.= Illustrated. Pott 8vo. Persian yapp, 3_s._
6_d._ net. Lambskin gilt, each 3s. net. Cloth gilt, 2s. net.
        I. G. F. Watts: A Biography and an Estimate. By J. E. Phythian.
          [_Third Edition._
       II. Rodin. By Fredk. Lawton.
      III. Burne-Jones. By J. E. Phythian.
       IV. Rossetti. By Frank Rutter.
        V. Turner. By J. E. Phythian.
       VI. Whistler. By Frank Rutter.

=Montaigne, Michael Lord of.= _See under_ Elizabethan Classics,
The.

=Napoleon.=

-- The Corsican: A Diary of Napoleon's Life in his own Words. Large post
8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net.

=Oldmeadow, Ernest.=

-- Portugal. With 32 illustrations. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 10s. 6d. net.
[_In preparation._

-- Day. With frontispiece in colour. 6s.

-- Antonio. With frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.

-- Aunt Maud. With frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.

-- The Scoundrel. With frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.

-- Susan. With frontispiece in colour by Frank Haviland. 6s.--Cheap
Edition. Crown 8vo. sewed, 1s. net. [_Fourth Edition._

-- The North Sea Bubble: A Fantasia. Illustrated. 6s. [_Out of print._

-- _See also under_ Temple of Fame, The.

=Olmsted, Millicent.=

-- The Land of Never Was. With 12 illustrations in colour. Fcap. 4to.
Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

=OMAR SERIES, THE.=--Royal 32mo. persian yapp gilt, each 1s. 6d. net;
leather gilt, 1s. net; cloth gilt, 6d. net.

-- The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.

-- A Shropshire Lad. By A. E. Housman.

-- Early Poems of D. G. Rossetti.

-- The Song of Songs.

-- Sister Benvenuta and the Christ Child. By Vernon Lee.

-- English Nature Poems: An Anthology.

-- In Memoriam. By Alfred Lord Tennyson.

-- Love Poems of Herrick: A Selection.

-- Everyman. A Morality Play. [_In preparation._

=Phythian, J. E.=

-- Fifty Years of Modern Painting: Corot to Sargent. Illustrated. Crown
8vo. Cloth gilt. 3s. 6d. net.

-- _See also under_ Masters of Art Series.

=Purdie, Mrs.=

-- Letters from a Grandmother. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 2s.
6d.

=Ravenhill, Alice, and Catherine J. Schiff.=

-- Household Administration: its Place in the Higher Education of Women.
Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 5s. net.

='Rector and the Rubrics, The.'= By the Author of 'When it was Light.'
Crown 8vo. Cloth. 1s. 6d. net. Sewed, 1s. net.

=Richards, Herbert, M.A.=

-- Platonica. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 7s. net.

-- Aristophanes and Others. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 7s. net.

-- Notes on Xenophon and Others. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 6s. net.

=Richardson, Frank.=

-- Love, and Extras. 6s.

=Russell, Charles Edward.=

-- Thomas Chatterton: The Story of a Strange Life, 1752-1770.
Illustrated. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net.

=Russell, G. W. E.=

-- A Pocketful of Sixpences: A Collection of Essays and Reminiscences.
Large post 8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

-- Seeing and Hearing. Large post 8vo. Cloth gilt. 7s. 6d. net. [_Out of
print._

-- Some Threepenny Bits. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. 3s. 6d. net. [_Out of
print._

=Rutter, Frank.=

-- _See under_ Masters of Art Series.

=Saleeby, C. W., M.D.=

-- Health, Strength and Happiness: a Book of Practical Advice. Crown 8vo.
Cloth. 6s. net.

=Scarfoglio, Antonio.=

-- Round the World in a Motor-car. With over 70 illustrations. Demy 8vo.
Cloth gilt 15s. net.

=Schiff, Catherine J.= _See under_ Ravenhill, Alice.

=Scott, A. MacCallum.=

-- Through Finland to St. Petersburg. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 2s.
6d. net.

=Scott, John Reed.=

-- Beatrix of Clare. Illustrated. 6s.

-- The Colonel of the Red Huzzars. Illustrated. 6s. [_Out of print._

=Scott, Sir Walter.=

-- Sir Walter Scott. Letters Written by Members of his Family to an Old
Governess. With an Introduction and Notes by the Warden of Wadham
College. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 5s. net. [_Out of print._

=Seccombe, Thomas.=

-- _See under_ Elizabethan Classics, The.

=Sedgwick, S. N.=

-- The Last Persecution. 6s.

=Shaw, Bernard.= _See under_ Jackson, Holbrook.

=Shelley, H. C.=

-- Literary By-paths of Old England. Illustrated. Royal 8vo. Cloth gilt.
12s. 6d. net. [_Out of print._

=Smith, Miriam.=

-- Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth. 2s. 6d. net.

=Sickert, Robert.=

-- The Bird in Song. With Frontispiece. Pott 8vo. Persian yapp, 3s. 6d.
net. Lambskin, gilt, 3s. 6d. net. Cloth gilt, 2s. net.

=Smith, Wellen.=

-- Psyche and Soma: A Drama. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

=Sowerby, Githa and Millicent.=

-- _See under_ Grimm's Fairy Tales.

=Sterling, Mary B.=

-- The Story of Sir Galahad. With 7 illustrations in colour by W. E.
Chapman. Pott 4to. Cloth. 5s. net.

=Stone, John.=

-- Great Kleopatra: A Tragedy in Three Acts. Large post 8vo. Cloth. 3s.
6d. net.

=Stonham, Charles, C.M.G., F.R.C.S.=

-- The Birds of the British Islands. With over 300 Photogravures by L. M.
Medland, F.Z.S. Complete in twenty parts. Royal 4to. 7s. 6d. net each.
Five volumes: Buckram gilt, 36s. net each. Half vellum, gilt, 42s. net
each. Half seal, gilt, 45s. net each.

=Swan, Mark E.=

-- Top o' the World. With 6 illustrations in colour and many in black and
white by Hy. Mayer. Pott 4to. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.

=TEMPLE OF FAME, THE.= Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt. Each 3s. 6d.
net.
        I. Great Musicians. By Ernest Oldmeadow.
       II. Great English Poets. By Julian Hill.
      III. Great English Novelists. By Holbrook Jackson.
       IV. Great English Painters. By Francis Downman.
        V. Great Soldiers. By George Henry Hart.

=Thomas, Edward.=

-- The Pocket Book of Poems and Songs for the Open Air. With End-papers
in Colour by William Hyde. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth gilt, 4s. net. Persian yapp,
in box, 5s. net.

=Thomas, Rose Haig.=

-- The Doll's Diary. With 24 illustrations by John Hassall. Crown 4to.
5s. net. [_Out of print._

=Thorburn, A.=

-- _See under_ Grant Richards's Nursery Library.

=Thorne, Guy.= _See under_ Duncan, Stanley.

=Troly-Curtin, Marthe.=

-- Phrynette and London. 6s. [_Third Edition._

=Troubetskoy, Prince Pierre.=

-- The Passer-By. 6s.

=Tweedale, Rev. C. L.=

-- Man's Survival after Death. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 6s. net.

=Tyler, Royall.=

-- Spain: A Study of her Life and Arts. With 130 Illustrations in
half-tone. Demy 8vo. Cloth gilt. 12s. 6d. net [_Out of print._

=Trafford-Taunton, Winefride.=

-- Igdrasil 6s. [_Out of print._

=Turner, Edgar, and Reginald Hodder.=

-- The Armada Gold. 6s.

=Vance, Louis J.=

-- The Bronze Bell. 6s.

-- The Black Bag. Illustrated. 6s.

-- The Brass Bowl. Illustrated. 6s.

-- The Private War. Illustrated. 6s.

-- Terence O'Rourke. 6s. [_Out of print._

-- The Pool of Flame. 6s.

-- Marrying Money. 6s.

=VENETIAN SERIES, THE.= Crown 16mo. Bound in cloth or in Venetian paper.
6d. net each.
        I. A Cypress Grove. By William Drummond of Hawthornden.
       II. The Marriage of Heaven and Hell. By William Blake.
      III. The Ancient Mariner. By Samuel Taylor Coleridge.

=Verne, Jules.=

-- The Chase of the Golden Meteor. Fully Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
5s.

=Waistcoat Pocket Guides, The= With Plans. Royal 64mo. Limp Cloth. 1s. 6d.
net.
