SCENE III



SCENE--The stokehole. In the rear, the dimly-outlined bulks of the
furnaces and boilers. High overhead one hanging electric bulb sheds
just enough light through the murky air laden with coal dust to pile up
masses of shadows everywhere. A line of men, stripped to the waist, is
before the furnace doors. They bend over, looking neither to right nor
left, handling their shovels as if they were part of their bodies, with
a strange, awkward, swinging rhythm. They use the shovels to throw open
the furnace doors. Then from these fiery round holes in the black a
flood of terrific light and heat pours full upon the men who are
outlined in silhouette in the crouching, inhuman attitudes of chained
gorillas. The men shovel with a rhythmic motion, swinging as on a pivot
from the coal which lies in heaps on the floor behind to hurl it into
the flaming mouths before them. There is a tumult of noise--the brazen
clang of the furnace doors as they are flung open or slammed shut, the
grating, teeth-gritting grind of steel against steel, of crunching
coal. This clash of sounds stuns one's ears with its rending
dissonance. But there is order in it, rhythm, a mechanical regulated
recurrence, a tempo. And rising above all, making the air hum with the
quiver of liberated energy, the roar of leaping flames in the furnaces,
the monotonous throbbing beat of the engines.

As the curtain rises, the furnace doors are shut. The men are taking a
breathing spell. One or two are arranging the coal behind them, pulling
it into more accessible heaps. The others can be dimly made out leaning
on their shovels in relaxed attitudes of exhaustion.

PADDY--[_From somewhere in the line--plaintively._] Yerra, will this
divil's own watch nivir end? Me back is broke. I'm destroyed entirely.

YANK--[_From the center of the line--with exuberant scorn._] Aw, yuh
make me sick! Lie down and croak, why don't yuh? Always beefin', dat's
you! Say, dis is a cinch! Dis was made for me! It's my meat, get me!
[_A whistle is blown--a thin, shrill note from somewhere overhead in
the darkness. Yank curses without resentment._] Dere's de damn engineer
crakin' de whip. He tinks we're loafin'.

PADDY--[_Vindictively._] God stiffen him!

YANK--[_In an exultant tone of command._] Come on, youse guys! Git into
de game! She's gittin' hungry! Pile some grub in her! Trow it into her
belly! Come on now, all of youse! Open her up! [_At this last all the
men, who have followed his movements of getting into position, throw
open their furnace doors with a deafening clang. The fiery light floods
over their shoulders as they bend round for the coal. Rivulets of sooty
sweat have traced maps on their backs. The enlarged muscles form
bunches of high light and shadow._]

YANK--[_Chanting a count as he shovels without seeming effort._]
One--two--tree--[_His voice rising exultantly in the joy of battle._]
Dat's de stuff! Let her have it! All togedder now! Sling it into her!
Let her ride! Shoot de piece now! Call de toin on her! Drive her into
it! Feel her move! Watch her smoke! Speed, dat's her middle name! Give
her coal, youse guys! Coal, dat's her booze! Drink it up, baby! Let's
see yuh sprint! Dig in and gain a lap! Dere she go-o-es [_This last in
the chanting formula of the gallery gods at the six-day bike race. He
slams his furnace door shut. The others do likewise with as much unison
as their wearied bodies will permit. The effect is of one fiery eye
after another being blotted out with a series of accompanying bangs._]

PADDY--[_Groaning._] Me back is broke. I'm bate out--bate--[_There is a
pause. Then the inexorable whistle sounds again from the dim regions
above the electric light. There is a growl of cursing rage from all
sides._]

YANK--[_Shaking his fist upward--contemptuously._] Take it easy dere,
you! Who d'yuh tinks runnin' dis game, me or you? When I git ready, we
move. Not before! When I git ready, get me!

VOICES--[_Approvingly._] That's the stuff!

Yank tal him, py golly!

Yank ain't affeerd.

Goot poy, Yank!

Give him hell!

Tell 'im 'e's a bloody swine!

Bloody slave-driver!

YANK--[_Contemptuously._] He ain't got no noive. He's yellow, get me?
All de engineers is yellow. Dey got streaks a mile wide. Aw, to hell
wit him! Let's move, youse guys. We had a rest. Come on, she needs it!
Give her pep! It ain't for him. Him and his whistle, dey don't belong.
But we belong, see! We gotter feed de baby! Come on! [_He turns and
flings his furnace door open. They all follow his lead. At this instant
the Second and Fourth Engineers enter from the darkness on the left
with Mildred between them. She starts, turns paler, her pose is
crumbling, she shivers with fright in spite of the blazing heat, but
forces herself to leave the Engineers and take a few steps nearer the
men. She is right behind Yank. All this happens quickly while the men
have their backs turned._]

YANK--Come on, youse guys! [_He is turning to get coal when the whistle
sounds again in a peremptory, irritating note. This drives Yank into a
sudden fury. While the other men have turned full around and stopped
dumfounded by the spectacle of Mildred standing there in her white
dress, Yank does not turn far enough to see her. Besides, his head is
thrown back, he blinks upward through the murk trying to find the owner
of the whistle, he brandishes his shovel murderously over his head in
one hand, pounding on his chest, gorilla-like, with the other,
shouting:_] Toin off dat whistle! Come down outa dere, yuh yellow,
brass-buttoned, Belfast bum, yuh! Come down and I'll knock yer brains
out! Yuh lousey, stinkin', yellow mut of a Catholic-moiderin' bastard!
Come down and I'll moider yuh! Pullin' dat whistle on me, huh? I'll
show yuh! I'll crash yer skull in! I'll drive yer teet' down yer troat!
I'll slam yer nose trou de back of yer head! I'll cut yer guts out for
a nickel, yuh lousey boob, yuh dirty, crummy, muck-eatin' son of a--

[_Suddenly he becomes conscious of all the other men staring at
something directly behind his back. He whirls defensively with a
snarling, murderous growl, crouching to spring, his lips drawn back
o'ver his teeth, his small eyes gleaming ferociously. He sees Mildred,
like a white apparition in the full light from the open furnace doors.
He glares into her eyes, turned to stone. As for her, during his speech
she has listened, paralyzed with horror, terror, her whole personality
crushed, beaten in, collapsed, by the terrific impact of this unknown,
abysmal brutality, naked and shameless. As she looks at his gorilla
face, as his eyes bore into hers, she utters a low, choking cry and
shrinks away from him, putting both hands up before her eyes to shut
out the sight of his face, to protect her own. This startles Yank to a
reaction. His mouth falls open, his eyes grow bewildered._]

MILDRED--[_About to faint--to the Engineers, who now have her one by
each arm--whimperingly._] Take me away! Oh, the filthy beast! [_She
faints. They carry her quickly back, disappearing in the darkness at
the left, rear. An iron door clangs shut. Rage and bewildered fury rush
back on Yank. He feels himself insulted in some unknown fashion in the
very heart of his pride. He roars:_] God damn yuh! [_And hurls his
shovel after them at the door which has just closed. It hits the steel
bulkhead with a clang and falls clattering on the steel floor. From
overhead the whistle sounds again in a long, angry, insistent command._]

[_Curtain_]





SCENE IV



SCENE--The firemen's forecastle. Yank's watch has just come off duty
and had dinner. Their faces and bodies shine from a soap and water
scrubbing but around their eyes, where a hasty dousing does not touch,
the coal dust sticks like black make-up, giving them a queer, sinister
expression. Yank has not washed either face or body. He stands out in
contrast to them, a blackened, brooding figure. He is seated forward on
a bench in the exact attitude of Rodin's "The Thinker." The others,
most of them smoking pipes, are staring at Yank half-apprehensively, as
if fearing an outburst; half-amusedly, as if they saw a joke somewhere
that tickled them.

VOICES--He ain't ate nothin'.

Py golly, a fallar gat gat grub in him.

Divil a lie.

Yank feeda da fire, no feeda da face.

Ha-ha.

He ain't even washed hisself.

He's forgot.

Hey, Yank, you forgot to wash.

YANK--[_Sullenly._] Forgot nothin'! To hell wit washin'.

VOICES--It'll stick to you. It'll get under your skin. Give yer the
bleedin' itch, that's wot. It makes spots on you--like a leopard. Like
a piebald nigger, you mean. Better wash up, Yank. You sleep better.
Wash up, Yank. Wash up! Wash up!

YANK--[_Resentfully._] Aw say, youse guys. Lemme alone. Can't youse see
I'm tryin' to tink?

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._]
Think! [_The word has a brazen, metallic quality as if their throats
were phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

YANK--[_Springing to his feet and glaring at them belligerently._] Yes,
tink! Tink, dat's what I said! What about it? [_They are silent,
puzzled by his sudden resentment at what used to be one of his jokes.
Yank sits down again in the same attitude of "The Thinker."_]

VOICES--Leave him alone.

He's got a grouch on.

Why wouldn't he?

PADDY--[_With a wink at the others._] Sure I know what's the matther.
'Tis aisy to see. He's fallen in love, I'm telling you.

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._]
Love! [_The word has a brazen, metallic quality as if their throats
were phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

YANK--[_With a contemptuous snort._] Love, hell! Hate, dat's what. I've
fallen in hate, get me?

PADDY--[_Philosophically_] 'Twould take a wise man to tell one from the
other. [_With a bitter, ironical scorn, increasing as he goes on._] But
I'm telling you it's love that's in it. Sure what else but love for us
poor bastes in the stokehole would be bringing a fine lady, dressed
like a white quane, down a mile of ladders and steps to be havin' a
look at us? [_A growl of anger goes up from all sides._]

LONG--[_Jumping on a bench--hecticly_] Hinsultin' us! Hinsultin' us,
the bloody cow! And them bloody engineers! What right 'as they got to
be exhibitin' us 's if we was bleedin' monkeys in a menagerie? Did we
sign for hinsults to our dignity as 'onest workers? Is that in the
ship's articles? You kin bloody well bet it ain't! But I knows why they
done it. I arsked a deck steward 'o she was and 'e told me. 'Er old
man's a bleedin' millionaire, a bloody Capitalist! 'E's got enuf bloody
gold to sink this bleedin' ship! 'E makes arf the bloody steel in the
world! 'E owns this bloody boat! And you and me, comrades, we're 'is
slaves! And the skipper and mates and engineers, they're 'is slaves!
And she's 'is bloody daughter and we're all 'er slaves, too! And she
gives 'er orders as 'ow she wants to see the bloody animals below decks
and down they takes 'er! [_There is a roar of rage from all sides._]

YANK--[_Blinking at him bewilderedly._] Say! Wait a moment! Is all dat
straight goods?

LONG--Straight as string! The bleedin' steward as waits on 'em, 'e told
me about 'er. And what're we goin' ter do, I arsks yer? 'Ave we got ter
swaller 'er hinsults like dogs? It ain't in the ship's articles. I tell
yer we got a case. We kin go ter law--

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Hell! Law!

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._] Law!
[_The word has a brazen metallic quality as if their throats were
phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

LONG--[_Feeling the ground slipping from under his feet--desperately._]
As voters and citizens we kin force the bloody governments--

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Hell! Governments!

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._]
Governments! [_The word has a brazen metallic quality as if their
throats were phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard,
barking laughter._]

LONG--[_Hysterically._] We're free and equal in the sight of God--

YANK--[_With abysmal contempt._] Hell! God!

ALL--[_Repeating the word after him as one with cynical mockery._] God!
[_The word has a brazen metallic quality as if their throats were
phonograph horns. It is followed by a chorus of hard, barking
laughter._]

YANK--[_Witheringly._] Aw, join de Salvation Army!

ALL--Sit down! Shut up! Damn fool! Sea-lawyer! [_Long slinks back out
of sight._]

PADDY--[_Continuing the trend of his thoughts as if he had never been
interrupted--bitterly._] And there she was standing behind us, and the
Second pointing at us like a man you'd hear in a circus would be
saying: In this cage is a queerer kind of baboon than ever you'd find
in darkest Africy. We roast them in their own sweat--and be damned if
you won't hear some of thim saying they like it! [_He glances
scornfully at Yank._]

YANK--[_With a bewildered uncertain growl._] Aw!

PADDY--And there was Yank roarin' curses and turning round wid his
shovel to brain her--and she looked at him, and him at her--

YANK--[_Slowly._] She was all white. I tought she was a ghost. Sure.

PADDY--[_With heavy, biting sarcasm._] 'Twas love at first sight, divil
a doubt of it! If you'd seen the endearin' look on her pale mug when
she shrivelled away with her hands over her eyes to shut out the sight
of him! Sure, 'twas as if she'd seen a great hairy ape escaped from the
Zoo!

YANK--[_Stung--with a growl of rage._] Aw!

PADDY--And the loving way Yank heaved his shovel at the skull of her,
only she was out the door! [_A grin breaking over his face._] 'Twas
touching, I'm telling you! It put the touch of home, swate home in the
stokehole. [_There is a roar of laughter from all._]

YANK--[_Glaring at Paddy menacingly._] Aw, choke dat off, see!

PADDY--[_Not heeding him--to the others._] And her grabbin' at the
Second's arm for protection. [_With a grotesque imitation of a woman's
voice._] Kiss me, Engineer dear, for it's dark down here and me old
man's in Wall Street making money! Hug me tight, darlin', for I'm
afeerd in the dark and me mother's on deck makin' eyes at the skipper!
[_Another roar of laughter._]

YANK--[_Threateningly._] Say! What yuh tryin' to do, kid me, yuh old
Harp?

PADDY--Divil a bit! Ain't I wishin' myself you'd brained her?

YANK--[_Fiercely._] I'll brain her! I'll brain her yet, wait 'n' see!
[_Coming over to Paddy--slowly._] Say, is dat what she called me--a
hairy ape?

PADDY--She looked it at you if she didn't say the word itself.

YANK--[_Grinning horribly._] Hairy ape, huh? Sure! Dat's de way she
looked at me, aw right. Hairy ape! So dat's me, huh? [_Bursting into
rage--as if she were still in front of him._] Yuh skinny tart! Yuh
white-faced bum, yuh! I'll show yuh who's a ape! [_Turning to the
others, bewilderment seizing him again._] Say, youse guys. I was
bawlin' him out for pullin' de whistle on us. You heard me. And den I
seen youse lookin' at somep'n and I tought he'd sneaked down to come up
in back of me, and I hopped round to knock him dead wit de shovel. And
dere she was wit de light on her! Christ, yuh coulda pushed me over
with a finger! I was scared, get me? Sure! I tought she was a ghost,
see? She was all in white like dey wrap around stiffs. You seen her.
Kin yuh blame me? She didn't belong, dat's what. And den when I come to
and seen it was a real skoit and seen de way she was lookin' at
me--like Paddy said--Christ, I was sore, get me? I don't stand for dat
stuff from nobody. And I flung de shovel--on'y she'd beat it.
[_Furiously._] I wished it'd banged her! I wished it'd knocked her
block off!

LONG--And be 'anged for murder or 'lectrocuted? She ain't bleedin' well
worth it.

YANK--I don't give a damn what! I'd be square wit her, wouldn't I? Tink
I wanter let her put somep'n over on me? Tink I'm goin' to let her git
away wit dat stuff? Yuh don't know me! Noone ain't never put nothin'
over on me and got away wit it, see!--not dat kind of stuff--no guy and
no skoit neither! I'll fix her! Maybe she'll come down again--

VOICE--No chance, Yank. You scared her out of a year's growth.

YANK--I scared her? Why de hell should I scare her? Who de hell is she?
Ain't she de same as me? Hairy ape, huh? [_With his old confident
bravado._] I'll show her I'm better'n her, if she on'y knew it. I
belong and she don't, see! I move and she's dead! Twenty-five knots a
hour, dats me! Dat carries her but I make dat. She's on'y baggage.
Sure! [_Again bewilderedly._] But, Christ, she was funny lookin'! Did
yuh pipe her hands? White and skinny. Yuh could see de bones trough
'em. And her mush, dat was dead white, too. And her eyes, dey was like
dey'd seen a ghost. Me, dat was! Sure! Hairy ape! Ghost, huh? Look at
dat arm! [_He extends his right arm, swelling out the great muscles._]
I coulda took her wit dat, wit' just my little finger even, and broke
her in two. [_Again bewilderedly._] Say, who is dat skoit, huh? What is
she? What's she come from? Who made her? Who give her de noive to look
at me like dat? Dis ting's got my goat right. I don't get her. She's
new to me. What does a skoit like her mean, huh? She don't belong, get
me! I can't see her. [_With growing anger._] But one ting I'm wise to,
aw right, aw right! Youse all kin bet your shoits I'll git even wit
her. I'll show her if she tinks she--She grinds de organ and I'm on de
string, huh? I'll fix her! Let her come down again and I'll fling her
in de furnace! She'll move den! She won't shiver at nothin', den!
Speed, dat'll be her! She'll belong den! [_He grins horribly._]

PADDY--She'll never come. She's had her belly-full, I'm telling you.
She'll be in bed now, I'm thinking, wid ten doctors and nurses feedin'
her salts to clean the fear out of her.

YANK--[_Enraged._] Yuh tink I made her sick, too, do yuh? Just lookin'
at me, huh? Hairy ape, huh? [_In a frenzy of rage._] I'll fix her! I'll
tell her where to git off! She'll git down on her knees and take it
back or I'll bust de face offen her! [_Shaking one fist upward and
beating on his chest with the other._] I'll find yuh! I'm comin', d'yuh
hear? I'll fix yuh, God damn yuh! [_He makes a rush for the door._]

VOICES--Stop him!

He'll get shot!

He'll murder her!

Trip him up!

Hold him!

He's gone crazy!

Gott, he's strong!

Hold him down!

Look out for a kick!

Pin his arms!

[_They have all piled on him and, after a fierce struggle, by sheer
weight of numbers have borne him to the floor just inside the door._]

PADDY--[_Who has remained detached._] Kape him down till he's cooled
off. [_Scornfully._] Yerra, Yank, you're a great fool. Is it payin'
attention at all you are to the like of that skinny sow widout one drop
of rale blood in her?

YANK--[_Frenziedly, from the bottom of the heap._] She done me doit!
She done me doit, didn't she? I'll git square wit her! I'll get her
some way! Git offen me, youse guys! Lemme up! I'll show her who's a ape!

[_Curtain_]





