LETTER XVI.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

We go on charmingly here, almost as soft and smooth as your ladyship. It
seems to me that love must stagnate if it have not a light breeze of
discord once in a while to keep it in motion. We have not tried any yet,
however. We had a lovely tour this forenoon, were out three long hours,
and returned to dinner in perfect harmony.

Mr. Boyer informed me that he should set out to-morrow morning for his
future residence, and soon put on the sacred bands. He solicited an
epistolary correspondence, at the same time, as an alleviation of the
care which that weighty charge would bring on his mind. I consented,
telling him that he must not expect any thing more than general subjects
from me.

We were somewhat interrupted in our confidential intercourse, in the
afternoon, by the arrival of Major Sanford. I cannot say that I was not
agreeably relieved. So sweet a repast, for several hours together, was
rather sickening to my taste. My inamorato looked a little mortified at
the cheerful reception which I gave the intruder, and joined not so
placidly in the social conversation as I could have wished.

When Mr. Boyer, after the major took leave, pressed me to give him some
assurance of my constancy, I only reminded him of the terms of our
engagement. Seeing me decided, he was silent on the subject, and soon
bade me an affectionate adieu, not expecting, as he told me, the
pleasure of a personal interview again for two or three months.

Thus far we have proceeded in this sober business. A good beginning, you
will say. Perhaps it is. I do not, however, feel myself greatly
interested in the progress of the negotiation. Time consolidate my
affections, and enable me to fix them on some particular object. At
present the most lively emotions of my heart are those of friendship,
that friendship which I hope you will soon participate with your
faithful

ELIZA WHARTON.



