LETTER XXXIII.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

My dear friend: I believe I must begin to assume airs of gravity; and
they will not be quite so foreign to my feelings now as at some other
times. You shall know the reason. I have been associated for three days
with sentiment and sobriety in the person of Mr. Boyer. I don't know but
this man will seduce me into matrimony. He is very eloquent upon the
subject; and his manners are so solemn that I am strongly tempted--yet I
dare not--to laugh. Really, Lucy, there is something extremely engaging,
and soothing, too, in virtuous and refined conversation. It is a source
of enjoyment which cannot be realized by the dissolute and unreflecting.
But then this particular theme of his is not a favorite one to me; I
mean as connected with its consequences--care and confinement. However,
I have compounded the matter with him, and conditioned that he shall
expatiate on the subject, and call it by what name he pleases,
_platonic_ or _conjugal_, provided he will let me take my own time for
the consummation. I have consented that he shall escort me next week to
see my mamma and my Lucy. O, how the idea of returning to that revered
mansion, to those beloved friends, exhilarates my spirits!

General Richman's politeness to me has induced him to invite a large
party of those gentlemen and ladies who have been particularly attentive
to me during my residence here to dine and take tea to-morrow. After
that, I expect to be engaged in making farewell visits till I leave the
place. I shall, therefore, forego the pleasure of telling you any
occurrences subsequent to this date until you see and converse with your
sincere friend,

ELIZA WHARTON.



