SCENE IV.


                _A Gallery in_ OLIVIA'S _House_.

        _Enter_ MARIA, _with a black Gown and Hood, and_ CLOWN.

    _Mar._ Nay, I pr'ythee, put on this gown and hood; make him believe,
thou art Sir Topas the curate; do it quickly: I'll call Sir Toby the
whilst.

                                                          [_Exit_ MARIA.

    _Clo._ Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself in't; and I
would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.

                                           _Enter_ SIR TOBY _and_ MARIA.

    _Sir To._ Jove bless thee, master parson.

    _Clo._ _Bonos dies_, Sir Toby: for as the old hermit of Prague, that
never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of King Gorboduc,
_That, that is, is_; so I, being master parson, am master parson: For
what is that, but that? and is, but is?

    _Sir To._ To him, Sir Topas.

    _Clo._ [_Opens the door of an inner Room_] What, hoa, I say,--Peace
in this prison!

    _Sir To._ The knave counterfeits well; a good knave.

    _Mal._ [_In the inner Room._] Who calls there?

    _Clo._ Sir Topas, the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the
lunatic.

    _Mal._ Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.

    _Clo._ Out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man? talkest
thou nothing but of ladies?

    _Sir To._ Well said, master parson.

    _Mal._ Sir Topas, never was man thus wrong'd; good Sir Topas, do not
think I am mad; they have bound me, hand and foot, and laid me here in
hideous darkness.

    _Clo._ Say'st thou, that house is dark?

    _Mal._ As hell, Sir Topas.

    _Clo._ Madman, thou errest: I say, there is no darkness, but
ignorance; in which thou art more puzzled, than the Egyptians in their
fog.

    _Mal._ I say this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance
were as dark as hell; and I say, there was never man thus abused: I am
no more mad than you are; make the trial of it in any constant question.

    _Clo._ What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild-fowl?

    _Mal._ That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.

    _Clo._ What thinkest thou of his opinion?

    _Mal._ I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.

    _Clo._ Fare thee well: Remain thou still in darkness: thou shalt
hold the opinion of Pythagoras, ere I will allow of thy wits; and fear
to kill a woodcock, lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare
thee well.

    _Mal._ Sir Topas, Sir Topas,--

    _Sir To._ My most exquisite Sir Topas,--

    _Clo._ Nay, I am for all waters. [_Takes off the gown and hood, and
gives them to_ MARIA.]

    _Mar._ Thou might'st have done this without thy hood and gown; he
sees thee not.

    _Sir To._ To him in thine own voice, and bring us word how thou
find'st him: Come by and by to my chamber.
                                         [_Exeunt_ SIR TOBY _and_ MARIA.

    _Clo._ [_Sings._] _Hey Robin, jolly Robin,
                          Tell me how thy lady does._

    _Mal._ Fool,--fool,--good fool,--

    _Clo._ Who calls, ha?

    _Mal._ As ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a
candle, and pen, ink, and paper; as I am a gentleman, I will live to be
thankful to thee for't.

    _Clo._ Master Malvolio!

    _Mal_. Ay, good fool.

    _Clo._ Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?

    _Mal._ Fool, there was never man so notoriously abused: I am as well
in my wits, fool, as thou art.

    _Clo._ But as well! then you are mad, indeed, if you be no better in
your wits than a fool.

    _Mal._ Good fool, some ink, paper, and light, and convey what I will
set down to my lady; it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing
of letter did.

    _Clo._ I will help you to't. But tell me true, are you not mad,
indeed? or do you but counterfeit?

    _Mal._ Believe me, I am not: I tell thee true.

    _Clo._ Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman, till I see his brains. I
will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.

    _Mal._ Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree. I pr'ythee, be
gone.

    _Clo._ [_Shuts the door of the inner Room, and sings._]
            _I am gone, sir,
            And anon, sir,
        I'll be with you again, &c._                           [_Exit._



