SCENE III.


                     _A Room in_ OLIVIA'S _House_.

                  _Enter_ MARIA _and_ SIR TOBY BELCH.

    _Sir To._ What a plague means my niece, to take the death of her
brother thus? I am sure, care's an enemy to life.

    _Mar._ By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights;
your niece, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.

    _Sir To._ Why, let her except before excepted.

    _Mar._ Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of
order.

    _Sir To._ Confine? I'll confine myself no finer than I am: these
clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too; an they
be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.

    _Mar._ That quaffing and drinking will undo you; I heard my lady
talk of it yesterday; and of a foolish knight, that you have brought in
here, to be her wooer.

    _Sir To._ Who? Sir Andrew Ague-cheek?

    _Mar._ Ay, he.

    _Sir To._ He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.

    _Mar._ What's that to the purpose?

    _Sir To._ Why, he has three thousand ducats a-year.

    _Mar._ Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats; he's a
very fool, and a prodigal.

    _Sir To._ Fye, that you'll say so! he plays o' the viol-de-gambo,
and hath all the good gifts of nature.

    _Mar._ He hath, indeed, all, most natural; for, besides that he's a
fool, he's a great quarreller; and, but that he hath the gift of a
coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling, 'tis thought among the
prudent, he would quickly have the gift of a grave.

    _Sir To._ By this band, they are scoundrels, and substractors, that
say so of him. Who are they?

    _Mar._ They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.

    _Sir To._ With drinking healths to my niece; I'll drink to her, as
long as there is a passage in my throat, and drink in Illyria: He's a
coward, and a coystril, that will not drink to my niece, till his brains
turn o' the toe like a parish-top--See, here comes Sir Andrew Ague-face.

                                     [SIR ANDREW AGUE-CHEEK, _without_.

    _Sir And._ Sir Toby Belch! how now, Sir Toby Belch?

    _Sir To._ Sweet Sir Andrew!

                          _Enter_ SIR ANDREW.

    _Sir And._ Bless you, fair shrew.

    _Mar._ And you too, sir.

    _Sir To._ Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.

    _Sir And._ What's that?

    _Sir To._ My niece's chamber-maid.

    _Sir And._ Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.

    _Mar._ My name is Mary, sir.

    _Sir And._ Good Mistress Mary Accost,----

    _Sir To._ You mistake, knight; accost, is, front her, board her, woo
her, assail her.

    _Sir And._ By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company.
Is that the meaning of accost?

    _Mar._ Fare you well, gentlemen.

    _Sir To._ An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, 'would thou might'st
never draw sword again.

    _Sir And._ An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw
sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?

    _Mar._ Sir, I have not you by the hand.

    _Sir And._ Marry, but you shall have; and here's my hand.

    _Mar._ [_Takes his hand._] Now, sir, thought is free: I pray you,
bring your hand to the buttery-bar, and let it drink.

    _Sir And._ Wherefore, sweet-heart? what's your metaphor?

    _Mar._ It's dry, sir.

    _Sir And._ Why, I think so; I am not such an ass, but I can keep my
hand dry. But what's your jest?

    _Mar._ A dry jest, sir.

    _Sir And._ Are you full of them?

    _Mar._ Ay, sir; I have them at my fingers' ends: marry, [_Lets go
his hand._] now I let go your hand, I am barren.          [_Exit_ MARIA.

    _Sir To._ O knight, thou lack'st a cup of canary: When did I see
thee so put down?

    _Sir And._ Never in your life, I think; unless you see canary put me
down: Methinks, sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian, or an
ordinary man has; but I am a great eater of beef, and, I believe, that
does harm to my wit.

    _Sir To._ No question.

    _Sir And._ An I thought that, I'd forswear it. I'll ride home
to-morrow, Sir Toby.

    _Sir To._ _Pourquoy_, my dear knight?

    _Sir And._ What is _pourquoy_? do, or not do? I would I had bestow'd
that time in the tongues, that I have in fencing, dancing, and
bear-baiting: O, had I but follow'd the arts!

    _Sir To._ Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.

    _Sir And._ Why, would that have mended my hair?

    _Sir To._ Past question; for, thou seest, it will not curl by
nature.

    _Sir And._ But it becomes me well enough, does't not?

    _Sir To._ Excellent; it hangs like flax on a distaff; and I hope to
see a housewife take thee between her legs, and spin it off.

    _Sir And._ 'Faith, I'll home to-morrow, Sir Toby: your niece will
not be seen; or, if she be, it's four to one she'll none of me: the duke
himself, here hard by, wooes her.

    _Sir To._ She'll none o' the duke; she'll not match above her
degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit; I have heard her swear it.
Tut, there's life in't, man.

    _Sir And._ I'll stay a month longer. I am a fellow o' the strangest
mind i' the world; I delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.

    _Sir To._ Art thou good at these kick-shaws, knight?

    _Sir And._ As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree
of my betters; and yet I'll not compare with an old man.

    _Sir To._ What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?

    _Sir And._ 'Faith, I can cut a caper.

    _Sir To._ And I can cut the mutton to't.

    _Sir And._ And, I think, I have the back-trick, simply as strong as
any man in Illyria.

    _Sir To._ Wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have these gifts
a curtain before them? why dost thou not go to church in a galliard, and
come home in a coranto? My very walk should be a jig. What dost thou
mean? is it a world to hide virtues in?--I did think, by the excellent
constitution of thy leg, it was form'd under the star of a galliard.

    _Sir And._ Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a
flame-colour'd stock. Shall we set about some revels?

    _Sir To._ What shall we do else? were we not born under Taurus?

    _Sir And._ Taurus? that's sides and heart.

    _Sir To._ No, sir; it is legs and thighs. Let me see thee
caper:--Ha! higher:--Ha, ha!--excellent!

                                                              [_Exeunt._



