ACT THE SECOND. SCENE I.

                                

                             _A Sea-port._

                    _Enter_ SEBASTIAN _and_ ANTONIO.

    _Ant._ Will you stay no longer? Nor will you not, that I go with
you?

    _Seb._ By your patience, no: my stars shine darkly over me; the
malignancy of my fate might, perhaps, distemper yours; therefore I shall
crave of you your leave, that I may bear my evils alone: It were a bad
recompense for your love, to lay any of them on you.

    _Ant._ Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.

    _Seb._ O, good Antonio, pardon me your trouble.

    _Ant._ Let me yet know of you, whither you are bound.

    _Seb._ No, 'sooth, sir; my determinate voyage is mere
extravagancy.--But I perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty,
that you will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in; therefore
it charges me in manners the rather to express myself.--You must know of
me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian, which I called Rodorigo; my
father was that Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard of:
He left behind him, myself, and a sister, both born in an hour. If the
heavens had been pleased, 'would we had so ended! But you, sir, altered
that; for, some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea, was
my sister drowned.

    _Ant._ Alas, the day!

    _Seb._ A lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was
yet of many accounted beautiful: but, though I could not overfar believe
that, yet thus far I will boldly publish her, she bore a mind that envy
could not but call fair. [_He weeps._]

    _Ant._ If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your
servant.

    _Seb._ If you will not undo what you have done, that is, kill him
whom you have recovered, desire it not. Fare ye well at once: my bosom
is full of kindness; and I am yet so near the manners of my mother,
that, upon the least occasion more, mine eyes will tell tales of me. I
am bound to the Duke Orsino's court, farewell.

    _Ant._ The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!

    _Seb._ Fare ye well.                                      [_Exeunt._



