THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW. CHAPTER I. THE GENEALOGY AND BIRTH OF CHRIST.


1 [1:1]AN account of the birth of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham. [1:2]Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and
Jacob begat Judah and his brothers; [1:3]and Judah begat Pharez and
Zarah by Thamar; and Pharez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram,
[1:4]and Ram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Nashon, and Nashon
begat Salmon, [1:5]and Salmon begat Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed
by Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse, [1:6]and Jesse begat David the king.

2 And David begat Solomon by the wife of Uriah, [1:7]and Solomon begat
Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa, [1:8]and Asa
begat Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat begat Jehoram, and Jehoram begat
Uzziah, [1:9]and Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz
begat Hezekiah, [1:10]and Hezekiah begat Manassah, and Manassah begat
Amon, and Amon begat Josiah, [1:11] and Josiah begat Jechoniah and his
brothers at the Babylonian exile.

3 [1:12]After the Babylonian exile, Jechoniah begat Shealtiel, and
Shealtiel begat Zerubabel, [1:13]and Zerubabel begat Abiud, and Abiud
begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azar, [1:14]and Azar begat Zadoc, and
Zadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud, [1:15]and Eliud begat
Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob, [1:16]and
Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, called
Christ. [1:17]All the generations therefore, from Abraham to David, are
fourteen generations; and from David to the Babylonian exile, fourteen
generations; and from the Babylonian exile to the Christ, fourteen
generations.

4 [1:18]The birth of Christ was thus. His mother Mary having been
espoused to Joseph, before they came together, was found to be with
child by the Holy Spirit. [1:19]But Joseph her husband being a
righteous man, and not wishing to make her an example, was designing to
put her away privately. [1:20]But while he was thinking of these
things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream,
saying, Joseph, son of David, fear not to take Mary your wife, for that
which is conceived in her is by the Holy Spirit, [1:21]and she shall
bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins.

5 [1:22]But all this was done, that the word of the Lord might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying; [1:23]Behold, the
virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son, and they shall call
his name Emmanuel; which is interpreted, God is with us. [1:24]And when
Joseph awoke from his sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord had
commanded him, and took his wife, [1:25]and knew her not till she bore
a son, and he called his name Jesus.




