CHAPTER X. CHRIST'S MIRACLES ATTRIBUTED TO DEMONS. HIS RELATIONS.



1 [12:22]THEN a blind and dumb demoniac was brought to him, and he
cured him, so that the blind and dumb spoke and saw.  [12:23]And all
the multitudes wondered and said, Is this the Son of David? [12:24]But
the Pharisees hearing it, said, This man does not cast out demons,
except by Beelzebul, a ruler of the demons. [12:25]But knowing their
thoughts, he said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is
destroyed; and no city or house divided against itself can stand.
[12:26]If Satan casts out Satan he is divided against himself. How then
can his kingdom stand?  [12:27]And if I by Beelzebul cast out demons,
by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they shall be your
judges. [12:28] But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then the
kingdom of God has come upon you. [12:29]Or how can one enter into the
house of a strong man and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the
strong man, and then he will plunder his house.

2 [12:30]He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not
with me scatters. [12:31]Therefore, I tell you, every sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be
forgiven men. [12:32] And if one speaks a word against the Son of man
it shall be forgiven him; but if one speaks against the Holy Spirit it
shall not be forgiven him either in this life or in that to come.
[12:33]Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree
bad, and its fruit bad; for a tree is known by its fruit.
[12:34]Offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things?
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. [12:35]The good
man, out of his good treasury, casts forth good things; and the evil
man, out of his evil treasury, casts forth evil things.  [12:36]But I
tell you, that for every idle word which men speak they shall render an
account in a day of judgment; [12:37] for by your words you shall be
justified, and by your words you shall be condemned.

3 [12:38]Then answered some of the scribes and Pharisees, saying,
Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you. [12:39]But he answered and
said to them, An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, and
no sign shall be given it but the sign of the prophet Jonah. [12:40]For
as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the fish, so
shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. [12:41]The men of Nineveh shall rise up in the judgment with
this generation and condemn it; for they changed their minds at the
preaching of Jonah; and behold a greater than Jonah is here. [12:42]The
queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation
and condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon; and behold a greater than Solomon is here.
[12:43]But when the impure spirit has gone out of a man, it goes
through dry places seeking a rest, and finds none. [12:44]Then it says,
I will return to my house from which I went out; and coming, it finds
it empty, swept, and adorned. [12:45]Then it goes and takes with itself
seven other spirits worse than itself, and they enter in and dwell
there; and the last state of that man is worse than the first. So shall
it be also with this evil generation.

4 [12:46]And while he was speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother
and his brothers stood without, desiring to speak to him.  [12:47]And
some one said to him, Behold your mother and your brothers stand
without, desiring to speak to you. [12:48]And he answered and said to
him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brothers?
[12:49]and stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, Behold my
mother, and my brothers! [12:50]For whoever does the will of my Father
in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.




