CHAPTER II. THE DAY OF PENTECOST AND ITS BLESSINGS.


1 [2:1]AND when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one
mind together. [2:2]And suddenly there came from heaven a sound as of a
violent wind borne along, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting; [2:3]and there appeared to them divided tongues as of fire,
and [one] sat on each one of them; [2:4]and they were all filled with
the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with tongues as the Spirit gave
them utterance.

2 [2:5]And there were Jews living at Jerusalem, pious men, of every
nation under heaven; [2:6]and when this sound was [heard], the
multitude came together and were astonished, for they each one heard
them speaking in his own language. [2:7]And they were astonished and
wondered, saying, Are not all these that speak Galileans? [2:8]And how
do we hear each one in our own language in which we were born,
[2:9]Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and those who live in
Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, [2:10]Phrygia and
Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and the Roman
strangers, both Jews and proselytes, [2:11]Cretes and Arabs, do we hear
them speak in our tongues of the great works of God. [2:12]And they
were all astonished and perplexed, saying one to another, What does
this mean? [2:13]But others mocking said, They are full of sweet wine.

3 [2:14]But Peter standing up with the eleven lifted up his voice and
said to them, Men of Judea, and all who live at Jerusalem, be this
known to you, and attend to my words. [2:15]For these are not drunk as
you suppose, for it is the third hour of the day [9 A.M.], [2:16]but
this is what was said by the prophet; [2:17]In the last days, says God,
I will pour out of my Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams; [2:18]and upon my male servants and
upon my female servants in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and
they shall prophesy.  [2:19]And I will show prodigies in heaven above
and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and a cloud of smoke.
[2:20]The sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood,
before the great and illustrious day of the Lord comes. [2:21]And
whoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

4 [2:22]Men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus the Nazoraean, a man
approved by God to you by mighty works and prodigies and miracles,
which God performed by him in the midst of you, as you yourselves know,
[2:23]this man, delivered up by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, you have affixed to the cross, and killed by the
hand of the wicked, [2:24]him has God raised up, having loosed the
pains of death, as it was not possible that he should be held by it.
[2:25]For David says of him, I saw the Lord always before me, he is on
my right hand that I should not be moved; [2:26]therefore my heart
rejoiced and my tongue was glad, and my flesh, moreover, shall also
live in hope; [2:27]for thou wilt not leave my soul in hades, nor
suffer thy Holy One to see destruction. [2:28]Thou hast made me know
the ways of life, thou wilt fill me with joy with thy presence.

5 [2:29]Men and brothers, let me speak to you freely of the patriarch
David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to
this day. [2:30] Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God swore
with an oath to him to set a descendant of his on his throne,
[2:31]foreseeing he spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that he was
not left in hades neither did his flesh see destruction. [2:32]This
Jesus has God raised up, whose witnesses we all are. [2:33]Being
therefore exalted on the right hand of God, and receiving the promise
of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he has poured this out which you
both see and hear.  [2:34]For David ascended not to heaven, but he
says, The Lord said to my lord, Sit on my right hand [2:35]till I make
your enemies your footstool. [2:36]Let all the house of Israel
therefore know certainly, that God has made this Jesus whom you
crucified both Lord and Christ.

6 [2:37]And hearing [this] they were distressed in mind, and said to
Peter and the rest of the apostles, Men and brothers, what shall we do?
[2:38]And Peter said to them, Change your minds, and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and
you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. [2:39]For the promise is
to you and your children, and to all that are afar off, as many as the
Lord our God shall call.  [2:40]And with many other words he testified
and exhorted, saying, Save yourselves from this perverse generation.

7 [2:41]Then those that received his word were baptized, and there were
added on that day about three thousand souls; [2:42]and they attended
constantly to the teaching and companionship of the apostles, the
breaking of bread and the prayers. [2:43]And fear was on every soul,
and many prodigies and miracles were performed by the apostles.
[2:44]And all who believed were together and had all things common;
[2:45]and they sold their possessions and estates, and distributed them
to all as any one had need; [2:46]and continuing day by day with one
accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, they
partook of food with gladness and simplicity of mind, [2:47]praising
God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added the
saved, day by day, to the assembly [church].




