CHAPTER III. THE IMPRISONMENT OF PETER AND JOHN.


1 [3:1]AND Peter and John went up together to the temple at the hour of
prayer, which is the ninth hour. [3:2]And a certain man lame from his
birth was carried and placed daily at the gate of the temple which is
called Beautiful, to ask charity of those going into the temple;
[3:3]who seeing Peter and John about to enter into the temple, asked to
receive a charity. [3:4]But Peter looking steadily at him with John,
said, Look on us. [3:5]And he gave his attention to them, expecting to
receive something from them. [3:6]But Peter said, Silver and gold have
I none; but what I have, this I give you; in the name of Jesus Christ
the Nazoraean, walk. [3:7]And taking him by the right hand he raised
him up; and immediately his feet and ankles were strengthened, [3:8]and
leaping up he stood and walked and entered with them into the temple,
walking and leaping, praising God. [3:9]And all the people saw him
walking and praising God; [3:10] and they knew him, that he was the one
who sat for charity at the beautiful gate of the temple, and they were
filled with wonder and astonishment at what had happened to him.

2 [3:11]And as he held Peter and John, all the people ran to them in
the porch which is called Solomon's, greatly wondering.  [3:12]And
Peter seeing it answered the people, Men of Israel, why do you wonder
at this? or why do you look intently at us as if by our power or piety
we had made him walk? [3:13]The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
the God of our fathers, glorified his servant Jesus, whom you delivered
up and denied before Pilate when he decided to release him; [3:14]but
you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked a murderer to be given
you, [3:15]but killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the
dead, whose witnesses we are. [3:16]And by the faith of his name, his
name has made strong this man whom you behold and know, and the faith
which is by him has given him this entire soundness before you all.
[3:17]And now, brothers, I know that you did it without knowledge, as
did also your rulers; [3:18]but what God had before declared by the
mouth of all the prophets that his Anointed should suffer, he has so
accomplished. [3:19]Change your minds, therefore, and turn yourselves,
that your sins may be blotted out, that times of refreshing may come
from the presence of the Lord, [3:20]and he send to you Jesus Christ
before appointed, [3:21]whom heaven must receive till the times of the
restoration of all things of which God has spoken by the mouth of his
holy prophets since the world began. [3:22]Moses indeed said, A prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up to you, of your brothers, like me; him
shall you hear in all things which he shall speak to you; [3:23]and
every soul which will not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from the
people. [3:24]And all the prophets, from Samuel and those following him
in order, who have spoken, have also announced these days. [3:25]You
are the children of the prophets, and of the promise which God promised
to our fathers, saying to Abraham, And in your offspring shall all the
families of the earth be blessed. [3:26]God having raised up his
servant has sent him to you first, to bless you by turning each [one of
you] from your evil ways.

3 [4:1]And while they were speaking to the people, the priests, and the
commander of the temple, and the Sadducees came upon them, [4:2]being
displeased because they taught the people and declared by Jesus the
resurrection of the dead; [4:3]and they laid hands on them and put them
in prison till the next day; for it was now evening. [4:4]But many of
those that heard the word believed, and the number of the men became
about five thousand.

4 [4:5]And on the next day the rulers, and elders, and scribes
[4:6]assembled at Jerusalem, and Annas the chief priest, and Caiaphas,
and John, and Alexander, and all that were of the family of the chief
priesthood, [4:7]and placing them in the midst, asked, By what power,
or by what name, have you done this?  [4:8] Then Peter, full of the
Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people and elders of Israel,
[4:9]if we are to-day examined concerning the good work done to the
sick man, by what means he has been cured, [4:10]be it known to you
all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ
the Nazoraean, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, by
him has this man stood before you sound. [4:11]This is the stone
rejected by you builders, which has become the head of a corner.
[4:12]And there is salvation in no other; for there is no other name
given under heaven among men, by which we can be saved.

5 [4:13]And seeing the boldness of Peter and John, and supposing that
they were illiterate and common men, they wondered, and perceived that
they had been with Jesus; [4:14]and seeing the man standing with them
cured, they could not dispute it. [4:15]And commanding them to withdraw
from the Sanhedrim, they conferred one with another, [4:16]saying, What
shall we do to these men?  for that a notable miracle has been
performed by them is manifest to all that live at Jerusalem, and we
cannot deny it; [4:17]but that it spread no further among the people,
let us threaten them severely, [and charge them] to speak no more to
any man in this name. [4:18]And calling them, they charged them not to
speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. [4:19]But Peter and John
answered and said to them, Whether it is right in the sight of God to
obey you rather than God, judge; [4:20]for we cannot but tell what we
have seen and heard. [4:21]And threatening them still further, they
dismissed them, not being able to punish them, on account of the
people, because all glorified God for what was done; [4:22]for the man
was more than forty years old on whom this miracle of the cure was
performed.

6 [4:23]And being dismissed they came to their friends, and related to
them what the chief priests and elders said to them.  [4:24]And when
they heard it they lifted up their voice with one consent to God, and
said, Master, thou who hast made heaven, and the earth, the sea, and
all things in them, [4:25]who by the mouth of thy servant David hast
said, Why did the nations rage and the peoples devise vain things?
[4:26]the kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were assembled
together against the Lord, and against his anointed. [4:27]For of a
truth, in this city, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the gentiles
and people of Israel, were assembled together against thy holy servant
Jesus whom thou hast anointed, [4:28]to do what thy hand and counsel
before appointed to be done. [4:29]And now, Lord, look down upon their
threatenings, and grant to thy servants with all boldness to speak thy
word, [4:30]by stretching out thy hand, that cures and miracles and
prodigies may be performed by the name of thy holy servant Jesus.
[4:31]And when they had prayed the place was shaken in which they were
assembled, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the
word of God with boldness.




