CHAPTER IV. THE LIBERALITY OF THE FIRST CHRISTIANS, ANANIAS AND SAPPHIRA, FURTHER PERSECUTION.


1 [4:32]AND the multitude that believed had one heart and one soul, and
none said that anything of his possessions was his; but they had all
things common. [4:33]And the apostles delivered the testimony of the
resurrection of the Lord Jesus with great power, and great favor was
towards them all. [4:34]For no one among them was needy; for those who
possessed lands or houses sold and brought the prices of the things
sold, [4:35]and laid them at the apostles' feet; and distribution was
made to each as any one had need. [4:36]And Joseph, called Barnabas by
the apostles, which is interpreted, A son of consolation, a Levite, a
Cyprian by birth, [4:37]having land, sold it, and brought the money and
laid it at the feet of the apostles.

2 [5:1]And one Ananias by name, with Sapphira his wife, sold a
possession, [5:2]and he kept back a part of the price, his wife also
being privy to it, and bringing a certain part laid it at the apostles'
feet. [5:3]But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart
that you should lie to the Holy Spirit, and that you should keep back a
part of the price of the land?  [5:4]Continuing unsold was it not
yours, and when it was sold was it not at your disposal? Why did you
propose this thing in your heart? You have not lied to men but to God.
[5:5]And Ananias hearing these words fell down and expired; and great
fear was upon all who heard. [5:6]And the young men arose and laid him
out, and having carried him out buried him.

3 [5:7]And after an interval of about three hours, his wife, not
knowing what had happened, came in. [5:8]And Peter answered her, Tell
me whether you sold the field for so much? And she said, Yes; for so
much. [5:9]And Peter said to her, Why have you agreed together to try
the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those that buried your
husband are at the door, and they shall carry you out. [5:10]And she
fell down immediately at his feet, and expired; and the young men
coming in found her dead, and carried her out, and buried her by her
husband. [5:11]And great fear was on all the assembly [church], and on
all that heard of these things.

4 [5:12]And many miracles and prodigies were performed among the people
by the hands of the apostles; and they were all of one accord in
Solomon's porch; [5:13]and no one of the rest dared to join them, but
the people magnified them; [5:14]and believers were added the more to
the Lord, multitudes both of men and women; [5:15]so that they brought
the sick into the streets and placed them on little beds and couches,
that as Peter passed along even his shadow might overshadow some of
them. [5:16]And the multitude came together from the cities about
Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those troubled by impure spirits, all
of whom were cured.

5 [5:17]And the chief priest arose, and all those with him, being the
sect of the Sadducees, and were filled with wrath, [5:18]and laid hands
on the apostles, and put them in the public prison.  [5:19]But an angel
of the Lord opening the prison doors by night led them out and said,
[5:20]Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of
this life. [5:21]And hearing this they entered into the temple early in
the morning and taught. And the chief priest coming, and those with
him, called the Sanhedrim together, and all the eldership of the
children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.

6 [5:22]But the officers going did not find them in the prison; and
returning they reported, [5:23]saying, The prison found we shut with
all safety, and the guards standing before the doors, but opening we
found no one within. [5:24]And when they heard these words, both the
priest and the commander of the temple and the chief priests doubted
concerning them, what this could mean.  [5:25]But some one came and
told them, Behold, the men whom you put in prison are standing in the
temple, and teaching the people.

7 [5:26]Then the commander going away with the officers brought them
without violence, for they feared the people, lest they should be
stoned; [5:27]and having brought them they placed them before the
Sanhedrim. And the chief priest asked them, [5:28]saying, We charged
you strictly not to teach in this name, and behold, you have filled
Jerusalem with your teaching, and wish to bring this man's blood on us.
[5:29]And Peter answering, and the apostles, said, It is necessary to
obey God rather than man. [5:30]The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom you took and hung on a cross; [5:31]him has God exalted, a Prince
and Saviour at his right hand, to give a change of mind to Israel and
the forgiveness of sins. [5:32]And we are his witnesses of these
things, and also the Holy Spirit which God has given to those that obey
him.

8 [5:33]And when they heard this they were highly offended, and took
counsel to kill them. [5:34]But a certain Pharisee in the Sanhedrim, by
the name of Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, in honor with all the
people, standing up requested them to put the men out a little while;
[5:35]and he said to them, Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what
you are about to do to these men.  [5:36]For before these days Theudas
arose, saying that he was somebody, to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, adhered, who was destroyed, and all who obeyed him passed away
and came to nothing.

9 [5:37]After him arose Judas the Galilean, in the days of the census,
and drew away people after him; and he was destroyed, and all who
obeyed him were dispersed. [5:38]And now I tell you, abstain from these
men, and let them alone; because if this design, or this work, is from
men, it will be destroyed; [5:39]but if it is from God, you cannot
destroy them; lest you be found at some time to be fighting against
God. [5:40]And they were persuaded by him, and calling the apostles and
scourging them, they charged them not to speak in the name of Jesus,
and dismissed them. [5:41]They went therefore from the presence of the
Sanhedrim, rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame
for the name of [Christ]; [5:42]and every day in the temple, and from
house to house, they ceased not teaching and preaching the good news of
Christ Jesus.




