CHAPTER V. THE APPOINTMENT OF SEVEN DEACONS, THE SERMON AND MARTYRDOM OF STEPHEN, AND A GENERAL PERSECUTION.


1 [6:1]AND in those days the disciples being multiplied, there was a
complaint of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, that their widows were
neglected in the daily service. [6:2]And the twelve calling the
multitude of the disciples, said, It is not desirable that we should
leave the word of God to serve tables. [6:3]Look out therefore,
brothers, from among you seven men of good repute, full of the Holy
Spirit, and of wisdom, whom we may set over this business; [6:4]but we
will attend continually to prayer, and the ministry of the word.

2 [6:5]And the proposition pleased all the multitude, and they elected
Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip and
Prochorus, and Nicanor and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus a
proselyte of Antioch, [6:6]and set them before the Apostles; and they
having prayed imposed hands on them. [6:7]And the word of God
increased, and the number of the disciples was greatly multiplied at
Jerusalem, and a great multitude of the priests obeyed the faith.

3 [6:8]And Stephen, full of grace and power, performed prodigies and
great miracles among the people. [6:9]But some members of the synagogue
called that of the Libertines and Cyrenians and Alexandrians and of
those from Cilicia and Asia, arose and disputed with Stephen, [6:10]and
were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit with which he spoke.
[6:11]Then they bribed men who said, We heard him speak blasphemous
words against Moses and God. [6:12]And they stirred up both the people,
and the elders, and the scribes, and coming suddenly they seized him
and led him to the Sanhedrim, [6:13]and brought forward false witnesses
who said, This man speaks incessantly against this holy place, and the
law; [6:14]for we have heard him say, that Jesus this Nazoraean will
destroy this place and change the customs which Moses gave us.
[6:15]And all who sat in the Sanhedrin looking steadily at him saw his
face like the face of an angel.

4 [7:1]And the chief priest said, Are these things then so?  [7:2]And
he said, Men, brothers, and fathers, hear. The God of glory appeared to
our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in
Haran, [7:3]and said to him, Go out from your country and your kindred,
and come to a land which I will show you. [7:4]Then going out from the
land of the Chaldeans, he lived in Haran. And thence, after the death
of his father, he removed into this land in which you now live.
[7:5]And [God] gave him no inheritance in it, not the breadth of a
foot, and promised to give it to him for a possession, and to his
posterity after him, when as yet he had no son. [7:6]And God said thus;
that his posterity should be a stranger in a foreign land, and they
shall enslave it and treat it injuriously four hundred years; [7:7]and
the nation which they shall serve will I judge, said God, and after
that they shall come forth and serve me in this place.

5 [7:8]And he gave him the ordinance of circumcision; and so he begat
Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac, Jacob, and
Jacob the twelve patriarchs. [7:9]And the patriarchs envying Joseph
sold him into Egypt; and God was with him [7:10]and delivered him from
all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and [he] made him governor over Egypt and all
his house.

6 [7:11]And there came a famine on all the land of Egypt and Canaan,
and great affliction, and our fathers found no provisions. [7:12]But
Jacob hearing that there was grain in Egypt, sent our fathers the first
time; [7:13]and the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers,
and Joseph's family was made known to Pharaoh. [7:14]And Joseph sent
and called for his father Jacob, and all the family of seventy-five
souls. [7:15]And Jacob went down to Egypt, and died, he and our
fathers; [7:16]and they carried him back to Shechem and buried him in
the tomb which Abraham bought for money of the sons of Hamor the father
of Shechem.

7 [7:17]But when the time of the promise which God made with an oath to
Abraham was at hand, the people increased and became numerous in Egypt,
[7:18]till another king arose who knew not Joseph. [7:19]This [king]
dealt deceitfully with our race, and treated injuriously our fathers,
causing their infants to be exposed that they might not be preserved
alive.

8 [7:20]At that time Moses was born, and was beautiful in the sight of
God, and was nourished three months in his father's house; [7:21]but
being exposed, the daughter of Pharaoh took him up and nourished him as
her own son. [7:22]And Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in his words and works. [7:23]And when he was
forty years old, it came into his mind to visit his brothers, the
children of Israel. [7:24]And seeing one injured he defended him, and
executed judgment for the oppressed, smiting the Egyptian. [7:25]And he
thought his brothers would understand that God would give them
salvation by his hand; but they understood not.

9 [7:26]On the following day also he showed himself to them as they
contended, and urged them to peace, saying, Men, you are brothers; why
do you injure one another? [7:27]But he that injured his neighbor
repelled him, saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?
[7:28]Will you kill me as you did the Egyptian, yesterday? [7:29]And
Moses fled at that saying, and lived a stranger in the land of Midian,
where he begat two sons.

10 [7:30]And forty years being completed there appeared to him in the
wilderness of Mount Sinai, an angel in a flame of fire, in a bush.
[7:31]And Moses seeing it, wondered at the sight; and coming near to
look at it, there was a voice of the Lord, [7:32]I am the God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. And Moses being
afraid dared not look at it. [7:33]And the Lord said to him, Put off
your shoes from your feet; for the place on which you stand is holy
ground. [7:34]I have seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and
have heard their groaning, and have come down to deliver them; and now
come, I will send you to Egypt.

11 [7:35]This is the Moses whom they denied, saying, Who made you a
ruler and a judge? Him did God send to be a ruler and a redeemer by the
hand of the angel that appeared to him in the bush. [7:36]This man
brought them out, having performed prodigies and miracles in Egypt, and
at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years. [7:37]This is the
Moses who said to the children of Israel, A prophet shall God raise up
for you, of your brothers, like me. [7:38] This is he that was with the
assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount
Sinai, and with our fathers, who received the living oracles to give
us, [7:39]whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him away and
turned back in their hearts to Egypt, [7:40]saying to Aaron, Make us
gods to go before us; for this Moses who led us up out of Egypt, we
know not what has happened to him.

12 [7:41]And they made a calf in those days, and offered a sacrifice to
the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.  [7:42]And God
turned and gave them up to serve the host of heaven, as it is written
in the book of the prophets; Did you offer victims and sacrifices to me
forty years in the wilderness, house of Israel, [7:43]and take up the
tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of the god Rephan, figures which you
made to worship? I will even remove you beyond Babylon.

13 [7:44]Our fathers in the wilderness received the tabernacle of the
testimony, as he that spoke to Moses charged him to make it according
to the pattern which he had seen; [7:45]which also our fathers
receiving it in succession brought with Joshua into the possession of
the nations, whom God expelled before the face of our fathers till the
days of David; [7:46]who found favor with God and desired to find a
dwelling for the God of Jacob.  [7:47]And Solomon built him a house.
[7:48]But the Most High dwells not in [temples] made with hands, as the
prophet says; [7:49]Heaven is my throne, and the earth my footstool;
what house will you build me, says the Lord, or what is the place of my
rest? [7:50]has not my hand made all these things? [7:51]Stiff necked,
and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always fight against the Holy
Spirit; as your fathers did, you also do.  [7:52]Which of the prophets
did not your fathers persecute? And they killed those who foretold the
coming of the Righteous One, of whom you now have become betrayers and
murderers, [7:53]who have received the law by orders of angels and have
not kept it.

14 [7:54]And when they heard these things they were enraged in their
minds and gnashed their teeth upon him. [7:55]But he being full of the
Holy Spirit, looking steadily to heaven saw the glory of God and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God, [7:56]and said, Behold, I see the
heavens opened and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.
[7:57]And crying with a loud voice they stopped their ears and rushed
upon him with one accord, [7:58]and casting him out of the city, stoned
him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at the feet of a young
man called Saul, [7:59]and they stoned Stephen, calling and saying,
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. [7:60]And kneeling down he cried with a
loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And having said
this he fell asleep. [8:1]And Saul consented to his death.

15 And at that time there was a great persecution of the church at
Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad through the regions of
Judea and Samaria, except the apostles. [8:2]And pious men buried
Stephen and made a great lamentation for him. [8:3]But Saul persecuted
the church, and going from house to house, seizing men and women,
committed them to prison.




