CHAPTER VI. THE EARLY MINISTRY OF PHILIP THE DEACON, THE CONVERSION OF THE SAMARITANS, THE ETHIOPIAN EUNUCH.


1 [8:4]Being scattered abroad, therefore, they went everywhere
preaching the good news of the word; [8:5]and Philip going down to a
city of Samaria preached Christ to them. [8:6]And the multitudes
attended with one accord to the things said by Philip, when they heard
him and saw the miracles which he performed.  [8:7]For impure spirits
came out of many who had them, crying with a loud voice; and many
paralytics and lame persons were cured; [8:8]and there was great joy in
that city.

2 [8:9]And there was a man by the name of Simon who formerly practised
magic in that city, and astonished the nation of Samaria, saying that
he was some great person, [8:10]to whom all from the least to the
greatest attended, saying, This is the power of God which is called
great. [8:11]And they attended to him because for a long time he had
astonished them with his magic arts. [8:12]But because they believed
Philip preaching the good news of the kingdom of God and the name of
Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. [8:13]And Simon
also himself believed, and being baptized attended constantly on
Philip; and beholding the mighty works and miracles that were
performed, he was astonished.

3 [8:14]And the apostles at Jerusalem hearing that Samaria had received
the word of God, sent to them Peter and John, [8:15]who came down and
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit; [8:16]for it
had not yet fallen on any of them, only they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus. [8:17] Then they laid hands on them and they
received the Holy Spirit. [8:18]And Simon seeing that the Holy Spirit
was given by the imposition of the hands of the apostles, offered them
money, [8:19]saying, Give me this power, that on whomsoever I lay my
hand he may receive the Holy Spirit. [8:20]But Peter said to him, Your
money go to perdition with you; because you have thought to purchase
the gift of God with money. [8:21]You have no part nor inheritance in
this work; for your heart is not right before God. [8:22]Turn your mind
therefore from this your wickedness, and pray the Lord if perhaps the
thought of your mind may be forgiven you; [8:23]for I see you are in
the gall of bitterness and bond of wickedness.  [8:24]And Simon
answered and said, Pray to the Lord for me, that none of the things
which you have said may come upon me.

4 [8:25]They then having fully testified and spoken the word of the
Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the good news to many
villages of the Samaritans. [8:26]And an angel of the Lord spoke to
Philip, saying, Arise and go to the south, by the way that leads from
Jerusalem to Gaza; this is a wilderness.  [8:27]And he arose and went.
And behold a man, an Ethiopian eunuch, an officer of Candace queen of
the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasures, who had come to
Jerusalem to worship, [8:28]and he was returning and sitting in his
chariot reading the prophet Isaiah.

5 [8:29]And the Spirit said to Philip, Go forward and join yourself to
his chariot. [8:30]And Philip running forward heard him reading the
prophet Isaiah, and he said, Do you really understand what you read?
[8:31]And he said [No]; for how can I unless some one teaches me? And
he invited Philip to come up and sit with him. [8:32]And the passage of
Scripture which he was reading, was this; As a sheep is led to
slaughter, and as a lamb before one that shears him is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth.  [8:33]In his humiliation his judgment was taken
away; and who will tell of his generation? for his life was taken from
the earth.

6 [8:34]And the eunuch answered and said to Philip, Of whom I pray you
does the prophet say this? of himself or of some other one? [8:35]And
Philip opening his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, preached
to him the good news of Jesus. [8:36]And as they went on the way they
came to a certain water, and the eunuch said, Behold water; what
hinders me from being baptized?  [8:38]And he commanded the chariot to
stop, and they both went down to the water, both Philip and the eunuch,
and he baptized him. [8:39]And when they went up from the water the
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no more;
for he went his way rejoicing. [8:40]But Philip was found at Azotus,
and passing through he preached the good news to all the cities till he
came to Caesarea.




