CHAPTER VII. THE CONVERSION OF SAUL, PETER CURING AENEAS, AND RAISING DORCAS FROM THE DEAD.


1 [9:1]BUT Saul, yet breathing out threatening and slaughter against
the disciples of the Lord, went to the chief priest [9:2]and asked of
him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of that
way, he might bring them bound, men and women, to Jerusalem. [9:3]And
he was going and had come nigh to Damascus, and suddenly a light shone
around him from heaven, [9:4]and falling on the earth he heard a voice
saying to him, Saul, Saul, Why do you persecute me? [9:5]And he said,
Who are you, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom you persecute. [9:6]But
arise and enter into the city, and it shall be told you what you must
do. [9:7]And the men travelling with him stood amazed, hearing indeed
the voice, but beholding no one. [9:8]And Saul arose from the earth,
and his eyes being opened he saw nothing; and leading him by the hand
they conducted him to Damascus.  [9:9]And he was three days without
sight, and neither eat nor drank.

2 [9:10]And there was a certain disciple at Damascus by the name of
Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias. And he said,
Behold, I am here, Lord. [9:11]And the Lord said to him, Arise and go
to the street called Straight, and inquire at the house of Judas for [a
man] by the name of Saul of Tarsus; for behold, he prays, [9:12]and has
seen a man by the name of Ananias coming and putting a hand on him,
that he might receive his sight. [9:13]And Ananias answered, Lord, I
have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to your
saints at Jerusalem; [9:14]and here he has power from the chief priests
to bind all that call on your name. [9:15]But the Lord said to him, Go,
for he is a chosen vessel to me, to bear my name both before nations
and kings, and the children of Israel; [9:16]for I will show him how
great things he must suffer for my name.

3 [9:17]And Ananias went and entered into the house, and laying hands
on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me, Jesus who appeared to
you on the way which you came, that you may receive sight and be filled
with the Holy Spirit. [9:18]And immediately there fell from his eyes as
it were scales, and he received his sight, and rising up was baptized,
[9:19]and having received food was strengthened.

4 And he was with the disciples at Damascus some days; [9:20]and
immediately in the synagogues he preached Jesus, that this is the Son
of God. [9:21]And all that heard him were astonished and said, Is not
this he that destroyed those who called on this name at Jerusalem, and
has come here for this purpose, that he might lead them bound to the
chief priests? [9:22]But Saul increased in power and confounded the
Jews living at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.

5 [9:23]And when some days had passed, the Jews took counsel to kill
him; [9:24]and their design was made known to Saul. And they watched
the gates day and night to kill him; [9:25]but the disciples took him
by night and sent him away by the wall, letting him down in a
store-basket.

6 [9:26]And going to Jerusalem he endeavored to join the disciples; and
they all feared him, not believing that he was a disciple. [9:27]But
Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and related to them
how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and
how he had spoken boldly in Damascus in the name of Jesus. [9:28]And he
was with them, entering in and going out at Jerusalem, [9:29]and
speaking boldly in the name of the Lord; and he spoke and disputed with
the Hellenists; and they undertook to kill him; [9:30]but the brothers
knowing it led him away to Caesarea and sent him to Tarsus.

7 [9:31]Then had the church peace in all Judea and Galilee and Samaria,
and being built up, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Spirit, they were multiplied.  [9:32]And Peter
passing through all places, went down also to the saints living at
Lydda. [9:33]And he found there a certain man by the name of AEneas,
who had lain on a bed for eight years, and was a paralytic. [9:34]And
Peter said to him, AEneas, Jesus Christ cures you; arise and make your
bed for yourself. And he immediately arose; [9:35]and all those who
lived at Lydda and Sharon saw him, and turned to the Lord.

8 [9:36]And there was at Joppa a certain female disciple called
Tabitha, which being interpreted is called, Dorcas; she was full of
good works and charities which she bestowed. [9:37]And in those days
she was sick and died; and having washed they put her in an upper room.
[9:38]But Lydda being nigh to Joppa, the disciples hearing that Peter
was there sent two men to him requesting, Do not delay to come to us.
[9:39]And Peter arose and came with them; and when he had come they led
him into the upper room, and all the widows stood by weeping and
showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with
them. [9:40] And Peter putting them all out knelt down and prayed, and
turning to the body he said, Tabitha, arise! And she opened her eyes,
and seeing Peter sat up. [9:41] And giving her his hand he raised her
up, and calling the saints and widows presented her living.  [9:42]And
this was known in all Joppa, and many believed on the Lord. [9:43]And
Peter continued many days at Joppa with one Simon a tanner.




