CHAPTER VIII. THE CONVERSION OF CORNELIUS, AND OTHER GENTILES.


1 [10:1]AND a certain man at Caesarea, named Cornelius, a centurion of
the cohort which was called the Italian, [10:2]a pious man, and one
fearing God with all his house, and bestowing many charities on the
people, and praying to God always, [10:3]saw clearly in a vision, about
the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming to him, and saying to
him, Cornelius.  [10:4]And looking steadily at him and being afraid, he
said, What is wanted, Lord? And he said to him, Your prayers and
charities have come up as a memorial before God. [10:5] And now send
men to Joppa and call for a certain Simon who is called Peter; [10:6]he
lodges with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea.  [10:7]And
when the angel who spoke to him had departed, he called two of the
house servants, and a pious soldier of those that attended constantly
on him, [10:8] and having related all things to them sent them to Joppa.

2 [10:9]And on the next day, as they were pursuing their journey and
had come nigh to the city, Peter went upon the house to pray, about the
sixth hour. [10:10]And he was hungry and wished to eat; and while they
were preparing a trance came upon him, [10:11]and he beheld heaven
opened, and a certain vessel like a great sheet descending, let down by
four corners to the earth, [10:12]in which were all the quadrupeds and
reptiles of the earth, and birds of heaven. [10:13]And a voice came to
him, Arise, Peter, kill and eat. [10:14]But Peter said, By no means,
Lord, for I have never eaten any thing common and impure. [10:15]And a
voice came to him again, a second time, What God has purified, regard
not common. [10:16]And this was done thrice, and immediately the vessel
was taken up to heaven.

3 [10:17]And while Peter doubted with himself what the vision which he
had seen meant, behold, even [then] the men sent by Cornelius, having
inquired for the house of Simon, stood at the gate, [10:18]and calling
aloud asked if Simon who was called Peter lodged there. [10:19]And
while Peter was considering of the vision, the Spirit said to him,
Behold, men seek you; [10:20]arise and go down and go with them without
hesitation, for I have sent them. [10:21]And Peter went down to the men
and said, Behold, I am the man whom you seek; what is the cause for
which you have come? [10:22]And they said, Cornelius a centurion, a
righteous man, and one that fears God, and esteemed by all the nation
of the Jews, was divinely instructed by a holy angel to send for you to
his house and hear words from you. [10:23]Then he called them in and
entertained them.

4 And the next day he arose and went with them, and some of the
brothers from Joppa went with him. [10:24]And on the day following they
came to Caesarea; and Cornelius was expecting them, and had called
together his relations and particular friends. [10:25]And when Peter
came in Cornelius met him, and falling down at his feet worshipped him.
[10:26]But Peter raised him up saying, Arise, I also am a man.
[10:27]And conversing with him he went in, and found many come
together; [10:28]and he said to them, You know that it is not lawful
for a Jew to associate with a man of another nation, or come into his
house; and God has taught me not to call any man common or impure;
[10:29]wherefore, being sent for I also came without objecting. I ask
therefore for what reason you have sent for me? [10:30]And Cornelius
said, From the fourth hour of the day I fasted till this hour, and at
the ninth hour I was praying in my house, and behold, a man stood
before me in splendid clothing, [10:31]and said, Cornelius, your prayer
is heard and your charities are remembered before God.  [10:32]Send
therefore to Joppa and call Simon who is called Peter; he lodges at the
house of Simon a tanner, by the sea, who when he has come will speak to
you. [10:33] Immediately therefore I sent to you, and you have done
well to come. Now therefore we are all present before God to hear all
things which God has commanded you.

5 [10:34]And Peter opening his mouth said, Of a truth I perceive that
God is not a respecter of persons, [10:35]but in every nation he that
fears him and does righteousness is acceptable to him. [10:36]The word
which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching the good news of
peace by Jesus Christ,--he is Lord of all,-- [10:37]you know; the word
which was [preached] through all Judea, beginning in Galilee after the
baptism which John preached, [10:38]Jesus from Nazareth, how God
anointed him with the Holy Spirit and power, who went about doing good
and curing all that were subjugated by the devil, for God was with him;
[10:39]and we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the
land of Judea, and at Jerusalem, whom also they killed, hanging him on
a cross. [10:40]This [man] did God raise up on the third day, and
permitted him to be made manifest, [10:41]not to all the people, but to
witnesses chosen before by God, to us, who eat and drank with him after
he rose from the dead; [10:42]and he commanded us to preach to the
people and testify fully that he is appointed by God the judge of
living and dead. [10:43]To him all the prophets bear witness, that
every one who believes in him has forgiveness of sins through his name.

6 [10:44]While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell
on all who heard the word. [10:45]And those of the circumcision who
came with Peter were astonished, that on the gentiles also the gift of
the Holy Spirit was poured out; [10:46]for they heard them speaking
with tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter answered, [10:47]Can any
forbid water that these should be baptized, who have received the Holy
Spirit as we also have? [10:48]And he commanded that they should be
baptized in the name of the Lord. Then they desired him to remain some
days.




