CHAPTER IX. PETER CALLED TO ACCOUNT FOR ASSOCIATING WITH GENTILES, AND JUSTIFIED; PREACHING TO THE GENTILES CONTINUED.


1 [11:1]AND the apostles and brothers who were in Judea heard that the
gentiles received the word of God. [11:2]And when Peter went up to
Jerusalem, those of the circumcision contended with him, [11:3]saying,
You went in to men that were uncircumcised, and eat with them.
[11:4]And Peter began and related to them in order, saying, [11:5]I was
in the city of Joppa praying, and I saw a vision in a trance, a vessel
like a great sheet descending, let down by the four corners from
heaven, and it came to me; [11:6]and looking into it attentively I
perceived and saw the quadrupeds of the earth and wild beasts and
reptiles and birds of heaven. [11:7]And I heard a voice saying to me,
Arise, Peter, kill and eat. [11:8]And I said, By no means, Lord, for
nothing common or impure has ever entered into my mouth. [11:9]And a
voice answered from heaven a second time, What God has purified do not
you regard common. [11:10]And this was done thrice, and again all were
taken up to heaven.

2 [11:11]And behold, immediately three men came to the house in which I
was, being sent for me from Caesarea. [11:12]And the Spirit told me to
go with them. And these six brothers also went with me, and we entered
into the house of the man. [11:13]And he told us how he had seen the
angel in his house standing and saying to him, Send to Joppa and call
Simon who is called Peter, [11:14]who will speak words to you by which
you shall be saved and all your house. [11:15] And when I began to
speak the Holy Spirit fell on them as also on us in the beginning.
[11:16]And I remembered the word of the Lord how he said, John indeed
baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit.
[11:17]If therefore God gave the gift equally to them and to us, who
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to
forbid God? [11:18] And hearing these things they were silent, and
glorified God, saying, Then to the gentiles also has God indeed given
the change of mind to life.

3 [11:19]And those scattered abroad by the affliction which commenced
with Stephen, went even to Phenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking
the word to no one but Jews only. [11:20]But some of them, Cyprians and
Cyrenians, who came to Antioch, spoke to the Greeks preaching the good
news of the Lord Jesus. [11:21] And the hand of the Lord was with them,
and a great number believed and turned to the Lord. [11:22]And a report
concerning them was brought to the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and
they sent Barnabas to go as far as Antioch; [11:23]who having come and
seen the grace of God rejoiced, and exhorted all to adhere to the Lord
with the purpose of the heart; [11:24]for he was a good man and full of
the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a great multitude were added to the
Lord.

4 [11:25]And he went to Tarsus to seek for Saul, [11:26]and found and
brought him to Antioch. And he was with them, and they met a whole year
with the church and taught a great multitude; and the disciples first
took the name of Christians at Antioch.

5 [11:27]And in those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to
Antioch; [11:28]and one of them, by the name of Agabus, standing up
signified by the spirit that a great famine was about to come on all
the world; which also came under Claudius Caesar.  [11:29]And each of
the disciples, according to his ability, determined to send help to the
brethren living in Judea; [11:30]which they also did, sending to the
elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.




