CHAPTER X. PERSECUTION BY HEROD AGRIPPA, HIS DEATH.--A.D. 44.


1 [12:1]AND at that time Herod the king put forth his hands to injure
some of the church. [12:2]And he killed James the brother of John with
the sword. [12:3]And seeing that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to
apprehend Peter also,--and it was during the days of unleavened
bread,-- [12:4]and having seized he put him in prison, committing him
to four companies of four soldiers each to guard him, wishing after the
passover to bring him before the people. [12:5]Peter therefore was kept
by the guard; but prayer was made incessantly by the church to God for
him.  [12:6]And when Herod was about to bring him forward, on that
night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains,
and guards kept watch before the door. [12:7]And behold, an angel of
the Lord came, and a light shone in the building; and striking Peter on
the side he awoke him saying, Arise quickly.  And his chains fell off
from his hands. [12:8]And the angel said to him, Gird yourself, and tie
on your sandals. And he did so.  And he said to him, Put your cloak
about you, and follow me.  [12:9]And going out he followed him, and
knew not that it was real which was done by the angel, but thought he
saw a vision.  [12:10]And passing through the first guard, and the
second, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened
to them of itself, and going out they went forward one street, and
immediately the angel left him. [12:11]And Peter coming to himself
said, Now I know that the Lord has really sent his angel and delivered
me from the hand of Herod and all the expectation of the Jews.

2 [12:12]And considering within himself he came to the house of Mary
the mother of John called Mark, where a great number were assembled
together and praying. [12:13]And knocking at the door of the gate, a
female servant, called Rhoda, came to listen, [12:14]and knowing the
voice of Peter she did not open the gate from joy, but ran in and told
that Peter stood before the gate.  [12:15]But they said to her, You are
mad. But she asserted strongly that it was so. And they said, It is his
angel.  [12:16]But Peter continued knocking; and having opened they saw
him, and were astonished. [12:17]And making signs to them with his hand
to be silent, he related how the Lord had conducted him out of the
prison, and said, Tell these things to James and the brothers. And
going out he departed to another place.

3 [12:18]And when it was day there was no small stir among the soldiers
as to what had become of Peter. [12:19]And Herod seeking and not
finding him, examined the guards, and commanded them to be put to
death, and going down from Judea to Caesarea remained [there].

4 [12:20]And he was displeased with the Tyrians and Sidonians; but they
came with one accord to him, and having persuaded Blastus who was over
the king's bedchamber, desired peace, because their country was
nourished by the king's. [12:21]And on an appointed day Herod having
put on his royal apparel, and sitting on the tribunal, made a speech to
them; [12:22]and the people shouted, It is the voice of a god, and not
of a man.  [12:23]And an angel of the Lord instantly smote him because
he gave not glory to God, and being eaten with worms he expired.
[12:24]And the word of God grew and was increased.




