CHAPTER XI. THE FIRST MISSION OF PAUL AND BARNABAS TO CYPRUS AND ASIA MINOR.--A.D. 46-49.


1 [12:25]AND Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having
performed the service, taking with them also John who was called Mark.
[13:1]And there were prophets and teachers in the church at Antioch;
Barnabas and Simeon called Niger [the black], and Lucius the Cyrenian,
and Manaen the foster brother of Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul.
[13:2]And while they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.
[13:3]Then having fasted and prayed and imposed hands on them, they
sent them forth.  [13:4]They, therefore, being sent forth by the Holy
Spirit went down to Seleucia, and thence sailed to Cyprus; [13:5]and
coming to Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of
the Jews; and they also had John for a servant.

2 [13:6]And having gone through the whole island to Paphos, they found
a certain magian, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Barjesus,
[13:7]who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man.
This man having called for Barnabas and Saul desired to hear the word
of God; [13:8]but Elymas the magian, for so his name is interpreted,
opposed them, seeking to turn away the proconsul from the faith.
[13:9]But Saul, [called] also Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit,
looking steadily at him [13:10]said, O full of all deceit and all
craft, son of a devil, enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? [13:11]And now, behold, the hand
of the Lord is upon you, and you shall be blind, not seeing the sun for
a season. And immediately there fell upon him a mist and darkness, and
going about he sought guides. [13:12]Then the proconsul seeing what was
done believed, and was astonished at the teaching of the Lord.

3 [13:13]And those with Paul, sailing from Paphos, went to Perga in
Pamphylia; but John left them and returned to Jerusalem.  [13:14]And
passing on from Perga, they went to Antioch in Pisidia, and going into
the synagogue on the Sabbath they sat down. [13:15]And after the
reading of the law and the prophets, the synagogue rulers sent to them,
saying, Men and brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the
people, speak.

4 [13:16]And Paul stood up, and motioning with his hand, said, Men of
Israel, and you that fear God, hear. [13:17]The God of this people
chose our fathers, and raised up the people in the exile in the land of
Egypt, and brought them out of it with a high arm. [13:18]And when he
had borne with their conduct forty years in the wilderness, [13:19]and
had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he distributed their
land to them by lot.  [13:20]And after this he gave judges four hundred
and fifty years till Samuel the prophet. [13:21]And then they asked for
a king, and God gave them Saul the son Kish, a man of the tribe of
Benjamin, forty years; [13:22]and removing him, he raised up for them
David for a king, of whom also he said and testified, I have found
David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.

5 [13:23]Of the posterity of this man, according to his promise, has
God raised up to Israel a Saviour, Jesus; [13:24]John having preached
before his coming the baptism of a change of mind to all the people of
Israel. [13:25]And when John completed his course, he said, Who do you
suppose I am? I am not [the Christ]; but behold, there comes after me
one the sandal of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.

6 [13:26]Men and brothers, children of the race of Abraham, and you
that fear God, the word of this salvation is sent to you.  [13:27]For
those living at Jerusalem, and their rulers, not knowing him and the
words of the prophets which are read every sabbath, fulfilled them by
condemning [him]; [13:28]and [although] they found no cause of death
[in him], they requested of Pilate that he might be destroyed;
[13:29]and when they had performed all things written of him, they took
him down from the cross and placed him in a tomb. [13:30]But God raised
him from the dead, [13:31]and he appeared many days to those who went
up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the
people. [13:32]And we declare to you the good news of the promise made
to the fathers, [13:33]that God has fulfilled this to us their children
in raising up Jesus, as it is written also in the first psalm, You are
my son, to-day have I begotten you.  [13:34]And that he raised him from
the dead never more to return to destruction, he said thus; I will give
you the sure promises of David. [13:35] Wherefore also in another place
he says, Thou wilt not suffer thy holy one to see destruction.
[13:36]For David, having in his generation served the will of God, fell
asleep, and was gathered to his fathers and saw destruction; [13:37]
but he whom God raised up saw not destruction. [13:38]Be it known to
you therefore, men and brothers, that through this man is preached to
you the forgiveness of sins, [13:39]and every one who believes is
justified by him from all things from which you could not be justified
by the law of Moses. [13:40] See then that what is said by the prophets
does not come upon you; [13:41] Behold, despisers, and wonder and
perish, for I perform a work in your days, a work which you shall by no
means believe even if one declares it to you.

7 [13:42]And when they had gone out, [the people] requested that these
words might be spoken to them on the next sabbath.  [13:43]And the
congregation being dismissed, many of the Jews and pious proselytes
followed Paul and Barnabas, who gave them additional instructions, and
persuaded them to continue in the grace of God. [13:44]And on the
following sabbath almost all the city came together to hear the word of
the Lord. [13:45]And the Jews seeing the multitudes were filled with
envy, and contradicted the things said by Paul, disputing and
blaspheming.  [13:46]And both Paul and Barnabas speaking boldly said,
It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken to you;
but since you cast it away, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal
life, behold, we turn to the gentiles. [13:47]For thus has the Lord
commanded us; I have set you for a light of nations, that you should be
a salvation even to the end of the earth. [13:48] And the gentiles
hearing this rejoiced and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many
as were appointed to eternal life believed; [13:49]and the word of the
Lord was spread through all the country. [13:50]But the Jews excited
the pious and honorable women, and the first men of the city, and
raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and cast them out from
their limits.  [13:51]And shaking off the dust of their feet against
them, they went to Iconium; [13:52] and the disciples were filled with
joy and the Holy Spirit.

8 [14:1]And at Iconium they went together into the synagogue of the
Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude of the Jews and Greeks
believed. [14:2]But the unbelieving Jews excited the minds of the
gentiles against the brothers, and made them ill-disposed.  [14:3]Then
they spent a long time in speaking boldly for the Lord, who testified
to the word of his grace by granting miracles and prodigies to be
performed by their hands. [14:4]And the multitude of the city were
divided; some were with the Jews, and some with the apostles. [14:5]And
when a design was formed by the gentiles and Jews with their rulers to
treat them injuriously, and stone them, [14:6]knowing it, they fled to
the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe, and the surrounding country,
[14:7]and preached the good news there.

9 [14:8]And there sat a certain man at Lystra, infirm in his feet, lame
from his birth, who had never walked. [14:9]This man heard Paul
speaking, who, looking steadily at him and seeing that he had faith to
be cured, [14:10]said with a loud voice, Stand up erect on your feet.
And he leaped, and walked. [14:11]And the multitude seeing what Paul
did, lifted up their voice in the language of Lycaonia, saying, The
gods have come down to us in the likeness of men; [14:12]and they
called Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercury, because he was a master of
eloquence.  [14:13]And the priest of the Jupiter which was before the
city brought bulls and garlands to the gates, and wished to offer
sacrifices with the multitudes. [14:14]But the apostles Barnabas and
Paul hearing of it, rending their clothes ran among the multitude,
crying [14:15]and saying, Men, why do you do these things? We are also
men subject to like sufferings with you, preaching that you should turn
from these vain [services] to the living God, who made heaven and
earth, and the sea, and all things in them, [14:16]who in past
generations permitted all nations to walk in their own ways;
[14:17]although indeed he left not himself without a witness, doing
good, giving rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness. [14:18]And saying these things they with
difficulty restrained the multitudes from sacrificing to them.

10 [14:19]But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and having persuaded
the multitudes, and having stoned Paul, they dragged him out of the
city, supposing that he was dead. [14:20]But while the disciples stood
around him, he arose and entered into the city. And on the next day he
went away with Barnabas to Derbe.  [14:21]And having preached the good
news to that city, and made many disciples, they returned to Lystra,
and Iconium, and Antioch, [14:22]confirming the souls of the disciples,
and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many
afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. [14:23]And having
appointed them elders in every church, and having prayed with fasting,
they commended them to the Lord in whom they had believed.

11 [14:24]And passing through Pisidia they came to Pamphylia,
[14:25]and having spoken the word in Perga they went down to Attalia,
[14:26]and thence sailed to Antioch, whence they had been commended to
the favor of God for the work which they performed. [14:27]And having
arrived, and assembled the church, they reported what God had done with
them, and that he had opened the door of faith to the gentiles.
[14:28]And they remained there not a little time with the disciples.




