CHAPTER XI. CHRIST'S PARABLES ON THE LAKE OF GALILEE.


1 [13:1]AND on that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the
lake. [13:2] And great multitudes came together to him; and he went
into the ship and sat down; and all the multitude stood on the shore.
[13:3]And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying; Behold, a
sower went out to sow; [13:4]and as he sowed, some fell by the way, and
the birds came and devoured it.  [13:5]And some fell on rocky places,
where it had not much earth, and it came up immediately, because it had
no depth of earth; [13:6]and when the sun arose it was scorched, and
because it had no root it was dried up. [13:7]And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns came up and choked it. [13:8]But some fell on
good ground, and bore fruit; some a hundred, some sixty, and some
thirty-fold. [13:9]He that has ears let him hear.

2 [13:10]And his disciples came and said to him, Why do you speak to
them in parables? [13:11]And he answered and said to them, Because it
is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given; [13:12]for whoever has, to him shall be also
given, and he shall abound; but whoever has not, from him shall be
taken away even what he has. [13:13]For this reason I speak to them in
parables; because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear,
nor understand. [13:14]And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah,
which says; Hearing you shall hear and not understand, and seeing you
shall see and not perceive; [13:15]for the hearts of this people have
become hard, and they hear imperfectly with their ears, and their eyes
have they closed, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn, and I should
heal them. [13:16]But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your
ears, for they hear. [13:17]For I tell you truly, that many prophets
and righteous men have desired to see what you see and have not seen
it, and to hear what you hear and have not heard it.

3 [13:18]Hear, therefore, the parable of the sower. [13:19]When any one
hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one
comes and takes away the seed sown in his heart.  This is he that
received seed by the way. [13:20]He that received seed on the rocky
places is he that hears the word and immediately receives it with joy
[13:21]but has no root in himself, but is only a temporary [disciple];
and when affliction or persecution arises on account of the word, he is
immediately offended. [13:22]And he that received seed among thorns is
he that hears the word, and the cares of this life and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
[13:23]But he that received the seed in the good ground is he that
hears the word, and understands it, who also bears fruit, and produces
some one hundred, and some sixty, and some thirty-fold.

4 [13:24]And he delivered them another parable, saying; The kingdom of
heaven is like a man sowing good seed in his field; [13:25]and while
the men slept, his enemy came and sowed poisonous darnel in the midst
of the wheat, and went away.  [13:26]But when the stalk grew up and
bore fruit, then the poisonous darnel appeared. [13:27]And the servants
of the householder came and said to him, Sir, did you not sow good seed
in your field? Whence then has it poisonous darnel? [13:28]And he said
to them, An enemy has done this. And they said to him, Do you wish us
to go and take them out? [13:29]And he said, No; lest in taking out the
poisonous darnel, you pull up the wheat with it; [13:30]let both grow
together till the harvest, and at the time of the harvest, I will say
to the reapers, Collect first the poisonous darnel, and bind it in
bundles to be burnt; but collect the wheat in my storehouse.

5 [13:31]He delivered them another parable, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is like a mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his field,
[13:32]which is the least of all seeds, but when it is grown is the
greatest of plants, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven
come and lodge on its branches. [13:33]He spoke another parable to
them; The kingdom of heaven is like leaven which a woman took and hid
in three sata [33 quarts] of flour, till the whole was leavened.
[13:34]All these things spoke Jesus to the multitudes in parables; and
without a parable spoke he not to them; [13:35]that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth
in parables; I will declare things which have been concealed from the
foundation of the world.

6 [13:36]Then leaving the multitudes; he went into the house, and his
disciples came to him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the
poisonous darnel of the field. [13:37]And he answered and said to them,
He that sows the good seed is the Son of man; [13:38]the field is the
world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; the poisonous
darnel are the children of the wicked one; [13:39] the enemy that sowed
them is the devil; the harvest is the consummation of the world; and
the reapers are angels.  [13:40]As, therefore, poisonous darnel is
collected and burned with fire, so shall it be at the consummation of
the world.  [13:41]The Son of man will send his angels, and they shall
collect out of his kingdom all offenses, and all that commit
wickedness, [13:42]and cast them into a furnace of fire; and there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. [13:43] Then the righteous
shall shine out like the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. He that
has ears, let him hear.

7 [13:44]The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field, which
a man found, and concealed, and went away with joy, and sold all that
he had and bought that field. [13:45]Again; the kingdom of heaven is
like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls, [13:46]who, finding one very
costly, went and sold all that he had and bought it. [13:47]Again; the
kingdom of heaven is like a net cast into the sea, and collecting
[fish] of every kind, [13:48]which, when it was full, men drew to the
shore, and sifting down put up the good in vessels and cast the bad
away.  [13:49]So shall it be at the consummation of the world. The
angels shall come forth and separate the evil from the midst of the
good, [13:50]and cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. [13:51]Have you understood all these
thing? They said to him, Yes, Lord.  [13:52]And he said to them, Every
scribe therefore that is instructed in the kingdom of heaven, is like a
householder who casts out of his treasury things new and old.

8 [13:53]And when Jesus had finished these parables he departed thence,
[13:54] and coming to his native country he taught them in their
synagogues, so that they were astonished and said, Whence has this man
this wisdom and these mighty works? [13:55]Is not this the carpenter's
son? Is not his mother called Mary? And are not his brothers James, and
Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?  [13:56]And are not his sisters all with
us? Whence then has this man all these things? [13:57]And they were
offended with him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without
honor, except in his native country, and in his own house; [13:58] and
he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.




