CHAPTER XII. THE COUNCIL AT JERUSALEM ON CIRCUMCISION.--A.D. 50.


1 [15:1]AND certain persons having come down from Judea taught the
brothers, If you are not circumcised according to the custom of Moses
you cannot be saved. [15:2]There being therefore no little dissension
and disputation of Paul and Barnabas with them, they determined that
Paul and Barnabas and some others of them should go up to the apostles
and elders at Jerusalem, concerning this question. [15:3]They,
therefore, being sent forward by the church, went to Phenicia and
Samaria, relating the conversion of the gentiles, and caused great joy
to all the brothers. [15:4]And when they came to Jerusalem they were
received by the church, and the apostles, and the elders, and related
what things God had done with them. [15:5]But some of those of the sect
of the Pharisees who had believed, rose and said, that it is necessary
to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.

2 [15:6]And the apostles and elders were assembled together to see
about this matter. [15:7]And after there had been much debate, Peter
rose and said to them, Men and brothers, you know that in former days
God chose among you that the gentiles should hear by my mouth the word
of the gospel and believe. [15:8] And the heart-searching God testified
to them, giving to them the Holy Spirit even as to us, [15:9]and made
no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by the faith.
[15:10]Now, therefore, why do you try God, to put on the necks of the
disciples a yoke which neither our fathers nor we could bear?
[15:11]But we believe that we shall be saved through the grace of the
Lord Jesus in the same manner as they.

3 [15:12]And all the multitude was silent, and heard Barnabas and Paul
relate what miracles and prodigies God performed among the gentiles
through them. [15:13]And after they were silent, James answered,
saying, Men and brothers, hear me. [15:14]Simeon has related how God
first visited the gentiles to take a people for his name. [15:15]And
with this agree the words of the prophets, as it is written,
[15:16]After this will I return and build up the tabernacle of David
which had fallen down, and rebuild its ruins, and set it up,
[15:17]that the rest of men may seek the Lord, even all the nations on
whom my name has been called, says the Lord who does these things,
[15:18]known from eternity.  [15:19]Wherefore I judge that we ought not
to trouble those who turned to God from the gentiles, [15:20]but to
send to them to abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and
fornication, and things strangled, and blood. [15:21]For Moses from
ancient times has those who preach him in every city, being read in the
synagogues every sabbath.

4 [15:22]Then it seemed good to the apostles and elders, with all the
assembly [the church], to send delegates from themselves to Antioch
with Paul and Barnabas, Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men
among the brothers, [15:23]writing by their hand, The apostles and
elders and brothers, to the brothers in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia,
who are of the gentiles, greeting.  [15:24]Since we heard that some
going out from us have troubled you with words subverting your souls,
to whom we gave no charge, [15:25]it seemed good to us, being of one
opinion, to send delegates to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
[15:26]men who have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. [15:27]We have sent, therefore, Judas and Silas, and they will
tell you the same things by word. [15:28]For it seemed good to the Holy
Spirit, and to us, to put no greater burden upon you except these
necessary things; [15:29] that you should abstain from things
sacrificed to idols, and blood, and things strangled, and fornication,
from which if you keep yourselves you will do well. Farewell.

5 [15:30]They, therefore, being dismissed went to Antioch, and
assembling the multitude delivered the epistle. [15:31]And reading it
they rejoiced at the exhortation. [15:32]And Judas and Silas being
themselves also prophets, exhorted the brothers with much argument, and
confirmed them. [15:33]And having staid [some] time, they were
dismissed in peace by the brothers to those that sent them. [15:35]But
Paul and Barnabas remained at Antioch, teaching and preaching with many
others the word of the Lord.




