CHAPTER XIII. PAUL'S SECOND MISSION TO ASIA MINOR.--A.D. 51-52.


1 [15:36]AND after some days Paul said to Barnabas, Let us return and
visit the brothers in every city in which we preached the word of the
Lord, [and see] how they do. [15:37]And Barnabas wished to take with
them John called Mark; [15:38] but Paul thought not best to take with
them one who deserted them at Pamphylia and did not go with them to the
work. [15:39]And there was a sharp contention, so that they separated
from each other; and Barnabas taking Mark sailed to Cyprus.

2 [15:40]But Paul choosing Silas went out, commended to the favor of
the Lord by the brothers. [15:41]And he passed through Syria and
Cilicia confirming the churches. [16:1]And he went to Derbe and Lystra.
And behold, there was a certain disciple there by the name of Timothy,
a son of a Jewish woman, a believer, but of a Greek father, [16:2]who
was commended by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium. [16:3]Him Paul
wished to have go with him; and he took and circumcised him on account
of the Jews who were in those places; for all knew that his father was
a Greek.

3 [16:4]And when he went through the cities he gave them the ordinances
to observe which had been determined by the apostles and elders at
Jerusalem.

4 [16:5]Then the churches were strengthened in the faith, and increased
in number daily. [16:6]And passing through Phrygia and the country of
Galatia, being forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia,
[16:7]coming by Mysia they endeavored to go into Bithynia; and the
Spirit of Jesus did not permit them; [16:8]and passing by Mysia they
went down to Troas. [16:9]And a vision appeared by night to Paul; a
certain man of Macedonia standing, asking him, and saying, Come over
into Macedonia and help us. [16:10]And when he saw the vision we
immediately sought to go into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had
called us to preach the good news to them.




