CHAPTER XIV. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY AT PHILIPPI ON THEIR FIRST MISSION TO EUROPE.--A.D. 52-53.


1 [16:11]AND sailing from Troas we came in a direct course to
Samothracia, and on the next day to Neapolis, [16:12]and thence to
Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, [and] a
colony. And we spent some days in that city. [16:13]And on the sabbath
we went out of the gate, by the river, where the proseuche [place of
prayer] usually was, and sitting down we spoke to the women who came
together. [16:14]And a certain woman by the name of Lydia, a dealer in
purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard, whose heart
the Lord opened to attend to the [words] spoken by Paul.

2 [16:15]And when she was baptized, and her house, she requested
saying, If you have judged me faithful to the Lord, come into my house
and stay; and she constrained us.

3 [16:16]And when we went to the proseuche, a certain female servant
having a spirit, a diviner, met us, who brought her masters much gain
by divining. [16:17]She following Paul and us, cried, saying, These men
are servants of the Most High God, who declare to us the way of
salvation; [16:18]and this she did for many days. And Paul being
grieved turned around and said to the spirit, I command you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And it came out of her in
that hour. [16:19]And her masters seeing that the hope of their gain
was gone, seizing Paul and Silas dragged them to the market, to the
rulers, [16:20] and bringing them before the prefects said, These men,
being Jews, greatly trouble the city, [16:21]and preach customs which
it is not lawful for us, being Romans, to receive or observe.
[16:22]And the multitude came together against them, and the prefects
tearing off their clothes gave orders to beat them with rods,
[16:23]and having inflicted many blows on them cast them into prison,
charging the jailer to keep them safely; [16:24]who, having received
such a charge, cast them into the inner prison, and made their feet
fast in the stocks.

4 [16:25]But at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sung praises to God,
and the prisoners heard them. [16:26]And suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and all
the doors were immediately opened, and the bands of all were removed.
[16:27]And the jailer awaking from sleep and seeing the doors of the
prison opened, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing
that the prisoners had escaped. [16:28]But Paul cried with a loud
voice, saying, Do yourself no harm, for we are all here. [16:29]And
asking for a light he sprang in, and fell down trembling before Paul
and Silas, [16:30]and bringing them out said, Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? [16:31] And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and you
shall be saved, and your house. [16:32]And they spoke the word of the
Lord to him and all those in his house.

5 [16:33]And taking them that hour of the night, he washed them from
their stripes, and was baptized, he and all his, immediately,
[16:34]and conducting them up into his house he set a table, and
rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God.  [16:35]And when
it was day the prefects sent the lictors, saying, Let those men go.
[16:36]And the jailer told these words to Paul; The prefects have sent
to let you go; now, therefore, go, and depart in peace.

6 [16:37]But Paul said to him, They have beaten us publicly
uncondemned, being Romans, and cast us into prison; and now do they
privately cast us out? No, indeed: but let them come themselves and
conduct us out. [16:38]And the lictors told these words to the
prefects, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans;
[16:39]and they came and besought them, and conducting them out desired
them to leave the city. [16:40]And going out of the prison they entered
into the house of Lydia, and having seen the brothers they exhorted
them, and departed.




