CHAPTER XV. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY AT THESSALONICA, BEREA, AND ATHENS.--A.D.  53.


1 [17:1]AND travelling through Amphipolis and Apollonia they came to
Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.  [17:2]And
according to his custom Paul went in to them, and reasoned with them
three sabbaths from the Scriptures, [17:3]explaining and asserting that
the Christ ought to suffer and to rise from the dead; and that this
Jesus whom I preach to you is the Christ. [17:4]And some of them
believed and adhered to Paul and Silas; of the pious Greeks a great
multitude, and of the chief women not a few. [17:5]But the unbelieving
Jews taking certain base men of those about the markets, and exciting a
mob, disturbed the city; and coming to the house of Jason sought to
bring them out to the people; [17:6]but not finding them, they dragged
Jason and some brothers to the rulers of the city, crying, These men
who have turned the world upside down have come here also, [17:7]and
Jason has received them; and they all do things contrary to the
ordinances of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
[17:8]And they excited the multitude and the rulers of the city hearing
these things, [17:9]and taking security of Jason and the rest they let
them go.

2 [17:10]And the brothers immediately, by night, sent away Paul and
Silas to Berea; and when they came they went into the synagogue of the
Jews; [17:11]but these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, for
they received the word with all readiness, examining the Scriptures
daily [to see] if these things were so. [17:12]Many of them therefore
believed, both of honorable Grecian women, and of men not a few.
[17:13]And when the Jews in Thessalonica knew that the word of God was
preached by Paul at Berea, they came there exciting the multitudes.

3 [17:14]Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away, as if to go by
sea; but Silas and Timothy remained there. [17:15]And those conducting
Paul brought him to Athens, and receiving a charge to Silas and Timothy
to come to him as soon as possible, they departed.

4 [17:16]And while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was moved
within him as he saw the city wholly devoted to idolatry.  [17:17]Then
he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and those that were pious,
and in the market every day with those he met.  [17:18]And some of the
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers disputed with him, and some said, What
does this trifler mean to say? And others, He seems to be a preacher of
strange demons; because he preached to them Jesus and the resurrection.
[17:19]And laying hold of him they brought him to the Areopagus,
saying, May we know what this new teaching is which is taught by you?
[17:20]for you bring certain strange things to our ears; we wish
therefore to know what these things mean. [17:21]And all the Athenians
and the strangers living there spend their leisure in nothing else but
telling or hearing something new.

5 [17:22]And Paul standing in the midst of the Areopagus said, Men of
Athens, I perceive that in all things you are extremely devoted to the
worship of demons. [17:23]For as I passed through, and observed your
objects of worship, I found also an altar on which was inscribed, TO AN
UNKNOWN GOD. What therefore you worship as unknown, this I declare to
you. [17:24]The God who made the world and all things in it, this [God]
being Lord of heaven and earth dwells not in temples made with hands,
[17:25]neither is he served by the hands of men as needing any thing,
since he gives to all life, and breath, and all things; [17:26]and he
made of one blood every nation of men to live on all the face of the
earth, determining their appointed times and the bounds of their
habitation, [17:27]that they should seek God, if perhaps they might
feel after and find him, and indeed he is not far from every one of us.
[17:28]For in him we live, and move, and are; as some also of your own
poets have said, For we are his offspring. [17:29]Being therefore an
offspring of God, we ought not to think the Deity to be like gold or
silver or stone, a work of art and human device.

6 [17:30]Overlooking therefore the times of ignorance, God now commands
all men everywhere to change their minds, [17:31]because he has
appointed a day in which he is about to judge the world in
righteousness, by the man whom he has appointed, giving assurance to
all by raising him from the dead. [17:32]But when they heard of a
resurrection of the dead, some scoffed; but others said, We will hear
you again of this. [17:33]So Paul went out from the midst of them;
[17:34]but certain men adhering to him believed, among whom were
Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with
them.




