CHAPTER XVI. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY AT CORINTH, HIS VISIT TO SYRIA AND ASIA MINOR.--A.D. 53-55.


1 [18:1]AND after this Paul left Athens and came to Corinth.  [18:2]And
finding a certain Jew by the name of Aquila, a native of Pontus, who
had recently come from Italy, and his wife Priscilla, because Claudius
had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome, he went to them, [18:3]and
because he was of the same trade continued and labored with them; for
they were tent makers.  [18:4]And he reasoned in the synagogue every
sabbath, and persuaded both Jews and Greeks.

2 [18:5]And when Silas and Timothy came from Macedonia, Paul gave
himself wholly to preaching the word, testifying to the Jews Christ
Jesus. [18:6]But when they disputed and blasphemed, shaking his
garments he said to them, Your blood be upon your heads; I, pure, from
this time will go to the gentiles.

3 [18:7]And departing thence he came into the house of a man called
Justus, who worshipped God, and whose house adjoined the synagogue.
[18:8]And Crispus the synagogue ruler believed in the Lord, with all
his house; and many of the Corinthians who heard believed and were
baptized. [18:9]And the Lord said to Paul, in a vision by night, Fear
not, but speak and be not silent, [18:10]for I am with you; and no one
shall attack you to hurt you, for I have many people in this city.
[18:11]And he remained there a year and six months, teaching among them
the word of God.

4 [18:12]And when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose with
one consent against Paul and brought him to the tribunal,
[18:13]saying, This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the
law. [18:14]And when Paul was about to open his mouth Gallio said to
the Jews, If there was any injustice or evil imposition, O Jews, I
would bear with you in a reasonable manner; [18:15] but if it is a
question of doctrine, and of names, and of your law, look to it
yourselves; for I will not be a judge of these things.  [18:16]And he
drove them from the tribunal. [18:17]And they all took Sosthenes the
synagogue-ruler and beat him before the tribunal; and Gallio cared for
none of these things.

5 [18:18]And Paul having remained yet many days took leave of the
brothers, and sailed to Syria; and Priscilla was with him, and Aquila,
having shaved his head at Cenchrea; for he had a vow.  [18:19]And they
came to Ephesus, and he left them there, and entering himself into the
synagogue reasoned with the Jews.  [18:20]And they asking him to stay a
longer time with them he did not consent, [18:21]but taking leave of
them and saying, I will return to you again, if God will, he sailed
from, Ephesus, [18:22]and coming down to Caesarea, and going up and
saluting the church, he went down to Antioch; [18:23]and having spent
some time there he went away, passing in order through the country of
Galatia and Phrygia, confirming all the disciples.




