CHAPTER XVII. PAUL AT EPHESUS.--A.D. 55-58.


1 [18:24]AND a certain Jew by the name of Apollos, an Alexandrian by
birth, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, being powerful in the
Scriptures. [18:25]This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and
being fervent in spirit spoke and taught correctly the doctrines
concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John; [18:26]and this man
began to speak boldly in the synagogue, and Priscilla and Aquila
hearing him took him and taught him more accurately the way. [18:27]
And he wishing to go into Achaia, the brothers sent him, and wrote to
the disciples to receive him. And when he came he helped those much who
had believed through the grace; [18:28]for he argued powerfully against
the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.

2 [19:1]And when Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, passing through the
higher portions of the country, came to Ephesus, and found certain
disciples; [19:2] and he said to them, Have you received the Holy
Spirit since you believed? And they said to him, We have not heard that
there is a Holy Spirit. [19:3]And he said to them, With what then were
you baptized? And they said, With John's baptism. [19:4]Paul said, John
indeed baptized [administered] the baptism of a change of mind, telling
the people to believe on him that was to come after him, that is, on
Jesus. [19:5]And hearing this they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus: [19:6]and Paul putting his hands on them, the Holy Spirit
came on them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. [19:7]And all
the men were about twelve.

3 [19:8]And going into the synagogue he spoke boldly, for three months,
reasoning and persuading in favor of the kingdom of God.  [19:9]But
when some were hardened and believed not, speaking evil of the way
before the multitude, he left them and separated the disciples from
them, and reasoned day by day in the school of one Tyrannus. [19:10]And
this was done for two years, so that all who lived in Asia heard the
word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.

4 [19:11]And God performed unusual miracles by the hands of Paul,
[19:12]so that napkins and aprons were brought from him to the sick,
and their diseases left them, and the evil spirits went out of them.
[19:13]And some of the travelling Jewish exorcists undertook to call
over those that had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I
adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul preaches. [19:14]And there were some
seven sons of Sceva, a Jew, a chief priest, who did this. [19:15]But
the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but
who are you?  [19:16]And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped
upon them, and overcome them, and prevailed against them, so that they
escaped from his house, naked and wounded. [19:17]And this was known
both to all the Jews and Greeks who lived at Ephesus, and fear fell on
them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified; [19:18]and many
of those who believed came and confessed, and showed their practices.
[19:19]And many of those who practised secret arts brought their books,
and burnt them before all; and they computed the price of them, and
found it to be fifty thousand [didrachmas] of silver [$8,333].
[19:20]So the word of the Lord increased powerfully and prevailed.

6 [19:21]And when these things were accomplished, Paul was disposed by
the Spirit, passing through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem,
saying, After I have been there I must see Rome.  [19:22]And sending
two that served him into Macedonia, Timothy and Erastus, he continued a
time in Asia.

7 [19:23]And there was at that time no small tumult about the way [of
the Lord]. [19:24]For a certain Demetrius by name, a silversmith, who
made silver temples of Diana, and afforded his artisans no small gain,
[19:25]assembling them together and laborers of like employments, said,
Men, you know that our prosperity is derived from this employment,
[19:26]and you see and hear, that not only at Ephesus, but in almost
all Asia, this Paul has led away a great multitude by persuasion,
saying that things which are made by hands are not gods. [19:27]And not
only this work of ours is in danger of coming into contempt, but even
the temple of the great goddess Diana of being set at nought, and her
majesty also which all Asia and the world worships, of being destroyed.

8 [19:28]And hearing this they were full of wrath, and cried, saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians! [19:29]And the whole city was full of
confusion; and they rushed with one accord to the theatre, taking Gaius
and Aristarchus, Macedonians, fellow travellers of Paul. [19:30]And
Paul wishing to go in to the people, the disciples did not permit him;
[19:31]and some of the rulers of Asia also, who were friendly to him,
sending to him, besought him not to expose himself in the theatre.
[19:32]Some therefore cried one thing, and some another; for the
assembly was confused, and the greater part knew not for what reason
they had come together. [19:33]And they advanced Alexander from the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward; and Alexander motioning with
his hand, wished to defend himself before the people.  [19:34]But
knowing that he was a Jew, there was one voice from all, for about two
hours, crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

9 [19:35]And the clerk having stilled the multitude, said, Men of
Ephesus, what man is there who does not know that the city of the
Ephesians is a worshipper of the great Diana, and of the Jove descended
[image]? [19:36]These things therefore being indisputable, it is best
to be quiet, and do nothing rashly.  [19:37]For you have brought these
men here, who are neither temple-robbers nor blasphemers of your
goddess. [19:38]If, therefore, Demetrius and the artisans with him have
a charge against any, court days are held, and there are pro-consuls;
let them accuse one another. [19:39]And if you desire any thing of
other matters, let it be determined in a lawful assembly.  [19:40]For
we are in danger of being called to account for the tumult of to-day,
there being no cause by which we can excuse this concourse. [19:41]And
having said these words he dismissed the assembly.




