CHAPTER XVIII. PAUL'S VISIT TO GREECE AND MACEDONIA AND HIS RETURN TO MILETUS.--A.D. 58, 59.


1 [20:1]AFTER the tumult was allayed, Paul calling the disciples and
embracing them departed to go into Macedonia. [20:2]And going through
those parts, and exhorting them with many words, he went into Greece;
[20:3]and when he had staid there three months, and a conspiracy was
formed against him by the Jews as he was about to sail to Syria, he
determined to return through Macedonia.  [20:4] And there followed him
to Asia, Sopater the son of Pyrrhus of Berea, and of those of
Thessalonica, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and
Timothy, and those of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus; [20:5]these going
before waited for us at Troas.  [20:6]And we sailed from Philippi,
after the days of unleavened bread, and came to those at Troas in five
days, where we staid seven days.

2 [20:7]And on the first day of the week, we being assembled to break
bread, Paul preached to them, being about to depart on the next day,
and continued his discourse till midnight; [20:8]and there were many
lamps in the upper room where we were assembled.  [20:9]And a young man
by the name of Eutychus sitting in a window, falling into a deep sleep
while Paul preached long, and being overcome by sleep, fell from the
third story down, and was taken up dead. [20:10]But Paul going down
fell on him, and embracing him, said, Be not troubled, for his life is
in him.  [20:11]And going up and breaking bread, and tasting it, and
conversing a long time till the break of day, he departed.  [20:12]And
they brought away the child alive, and were not a little comforted.

3 [20:13]And we going before by ship sailed to Assos, being about to take
in Paul at that place; for so had he appointed, being about to go on
foot himself. [20:14]And when he met us at Assos, we took him in and
came to Mitylene, [20:15]and sailing thence, on the next day we came
opposite to Chios, and in another day we touched at Samos, and stopping
at Trogylium, on the day following we came to Miletus. [20:16]For Paul
had determined to sail by Ephesus, that it might not be necessary for
him to spend a long time in Asia; for he hastened, if it was possible
for him, to be at Jerusalem at the day of Pentecost.

4 [20:17]And from Miletus sending to Ephesus he called for the elders
of the church. [20:18]And when they had come to him, he said to them,
You know from the first day that I came into Asia, how I was with you
at all times, [20:19] serving the Lord with all humility, and tears and
trials that befell me by the conspiracies of the Jews, [20:20]how I
kept not back from declaring to you and teaching you publicly and from
house to house any thing that was profitable, [20:21]testifying both to
Jews and Greeks the change of mind to God, and the faith in our Lord
Jesus. [20:22]And behold now, I go constrained by the Spirit to
Jerusalem, not knowing the things which shall befall me there,
[20:23]except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city,
saying, That bonds and afflictions await me. [20:24]But life precious
to myself, I make of no account that I may finish my course and the
service which I received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of
the grace of God.

5 [20:25]And now, behold, I know that you all among whom I have gone
preaching the kingdom shall see my face no more.  [20:26]Wherefore I
call you to witness this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men;
[20:27]for I have not kept back from declaring to you all the counsel
of God. [20:28]Take heed to yourselves, therefore, and to all the flock
in which the Holy Spirit has made you bishops, to feed the church of
the Lord which he has purchased with his blood. [20:29]For I know that
after my departure grievous wolves will come among you, not sparing the
flock, [20:30]and of yourselves men will arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. [20:31]Wherefore watch,
remembering that for three years, night and day, I ceased not to
admonish every one of you with tears. [20:32]And now I commend you to
God, and the word of his grace, who is able to build you up and to give
you an inheritance with all the sanctified. [20:33]I have coveted no
man's silver or gold or clothing; [20:34]you yourselves know that these
hands have served my necessities and those with me. [20:35]I have
showed you all things, that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he said, It is more
blessed to give than to receive.

6 [20:36]And having said these words he kneeled down, and prayed with
them all. [20:37]And they all wept much, and fell on Paul's neck and
kissed him, [20:38] grieving most of all for the word which he said,
that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the
ship.




