CHAPTER XIX. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY PURSUING THEIR JOURNEY TO CAESAREA AND JERUSALEM, ETC.--A.D. 59.


1 [21:1]AND when we had torn ourselves from them we set sail, and going
in a straight course came to Cos, and on the next day to Rhodes, and
thence to Patara. [21:2]And finding a ship crossing to Phenicia, going
on board we set sail. [21:3]And observing Cyprus, and leaving it on the
left, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre; for there the ship was to
discharge her cargo.  [21:4] And finding the disciples we continued
there seven days; and they told Paul, by the Spirit, not to go on to
Jerusalem.  [21:5]And when we had completed the days we went out and
proceeded on our journey, they all attending us with their wives and
children till without the city, and kneeling down on the shore we
prayed, [21:6]and having saluted each other we went to the ship, and
they returned to their homes.

2 [21:7]Having completed our voyage from Tyre we went to Ptolemais, and
having saluted the brothers continued with them one day. [21:8]And
departing on the next day we came to Caesarea, and going to the house
of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, we staid with him.
[21:9]This man had four virgin daughters who prophesied. [21:10]And
having continued there many days, there came down a certain prophet
from Judea by the name of Agabus, [21:11]and coming to us, and taking
Paul's girdle, and binding his hands and feet, he said, These things,
says the Holy Spirit; Thus will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owns this girdle, and deliver him into the hands of the gentiles.
[21:12]And when we heard these things, we and the people of the place
besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. [21:13]But Paul answered, What
do you do, to weep and break my heart? For I am ready not only to be
bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus.
[21:14]And he not being persuaded, we were silent, saying, The will of
the Lord be done.

3 [21:15]And after these days, having made preparation, we went up to
Jerusalem; [21:16]and some of the disciples from Caesarea went up with
us, conducting [us] to Mnason a Cyprian, an early disciple with whom we
lodged.

4 [21:17]And when we arrived at Jerusalem the brothers received us
gladly. [21:18]And on the following day Paul went with us to James, and
all the elders were present. [21:19]And having saluted them, he related
particularly what God had done among the gentiles by his ministry;
[21:20]and having heard, they glorified God, and said to him, You see,
brother, how many ten thousands there are of those who have believed,
among the Jews, and all are zealots of the law; [21:21]and they have
been informed of you, that you teach all the Jews among the gentiles to
apostatize from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children,
nor to walk according to the customs. [21:22]What then is [to be done]?
They will hear everywhere that you have come. [21:23]Do this,
therefore, which we tell you. We have four men having a vow upon them;
[21:24]take them and be purified with them, and pay their expenses,
that they may shave their heads, and all will know that the information
which they have of you is not correct, but that you walk also yourself
keeping the law. [21:25]But concerning the gentiles who have believed,
we have sent, judging that they should avoid things offered to idols,
and blood, and things strangled, and fornication. [21:26]Then Paul
taking the men, on the following day being purified with them went into
the temple, announcing the completion of the days of purification till
an offering should be offered for each one of them.




