CHAPTER XXI. PAUL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM, AND SENT TO CAESAREA FOR SAFE KEEPING.--A.D. 59.


1 [22:30]AND on the next day, wishing to know the truth in respect to
what he was accused of by the Jews, [the chiliarch] released him, and
commanded the chief priests and all the Sanhedrim to come together; and
bringing Paul down he set him before them. [23:1]And Paul looking
steadily at the Sanhedrim, said, Men and brothers, I have lived before
God in all good conscience to this day. [23:2]And the chief priest
Ananias commanded those standing by to strike him on the mouth.
[23:3]Then Paul said to him, God is about to strike you, whitewashed
wall; and do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me
to be struck contrary to the law? [23:4]And those standing by said, Do
you revile God's chief priest?  [23:5]And Paul said, I knew not
brothers that he was a chief priest; for it is written, You shall not
speak evil of the ruler of your people.

2 [23:6]And Paul knowing that one part were Sadducees and the other
Pharisees, cried in the Sanhedrim, Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee
and the son of Pharisees; for the hope and resurrection of the dead am
I under trial. [23:7] And having said this, there was a dissension
between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the multitude were divided.
[23:8]For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither
angel, nor spirit, but the Pharisees confess both. [23:9]And there was
a great cry, and the scribes of the party of the Pharisees rising up
contended, saying, We find no evil in this man; but [what] if a spirit
or an angel has spoken to him? [23:10]And there being a great
dissension, the chiliarch, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by
them, commanded the troops to come down and take him by force from the
midst of them, and conduct him to the fortress.

3 [23:11]And on the following night the Lord stood by him and said, Be
of good courage, for as you have testified of me at Jerusalem, so you
must also testify at Rome. [23:12]And when it was day, the Jews formed
a conspiracy and bound themselves by an oath, saying that they would
not eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. [23:13]And there were more
than forty who took this oath, [23:14] who came to the chief priests
and elders and said, We have bound ourselves under a curse to taste
nothing till we kill Paul. [23:15]Now, therefore, speak to the
chiliarch, with the Sanhedrim, to bring him down to you tomorrow, as if
you were about to investigate his case more accurately, and we, before
he comes nigh, are ready to kill him.

4 [23:16]But a son of Paul's sister hearing of this lying in wait, went
and entering into the fortress told Paul. [23:17]And Paul calling one
of the centurions, said, Lead this young man to the chiliarch, for he
has something to tell him. [23:18]He therefore took him and led him to
the chiliarch, and said, Paul the prisoner called me and asked me to
lead this young man to you, who has something to tell you. [23:19]And
the chiliarch taking him by the hand and leading him aside, inquired,
What is it that you have to tell me? [23:20]And he said, The Jews have
entered into a compact to ask you to bring down Paul to the Sanhedrim
to-morrow, as if about to learn more accurately of something concerning
him. [23:21]But do not therefore be persuaded by them; for more than
forty men of them lie in wait, who have taken an oath not to eat nor
drink till they have killed him, and now they are ready, awaiting an
answer from you.  [23:22]Then the chiliarch dismissed the young man,
charging him, Tell no one that you have informed me of these things.

5 [23:23]And calling two of the centurions he said, Prepare two hundred
soldiers to go to Caesarea, and seventy horsemen and two hundred light
armed troops, after the third hour of the night.  [23:24]And provide
animals to put Paul on, and take him safely to Felix the procurator.
[23:25]And he wrote a letter having this form; [23:26]Claudius Lysias
to the most excellent procurator Felix, greeting. [23:27]I went with
the soldiery and rescued this man, when he was seized by the Jews, and
about to be killed by them, having learned that he is a Roman;
[23:28]and wishing to know the cause for which they accuse him, I took
him down to their Sanhedrim, [23:29]and found him criminated in respect
to questions of their law, but charged with nothing worthy of death or
bonds. [23:30]Being informed that a conspiracy was about to be formed
against the man, I immediately sent to you, commanding also his
accusers to speak before you.

6 [23:31]The soldiers therefore took Paul as they were commanded and
brought him by night to Antipatris, [23:32]and the next day leaving the
horsemen to go with him, they returned to the fortress. [23:33]And when
they came to Caesarea, and had delivered the letter to the procurator,
they also presented Paul to him. [23:34]And having read, he asked of
what province he was; and learning that he was of Cilicia, [23:35]I
will hear you, he said, when your accusers have come; and he commanded
him to be kept in the Praetorium of Herod.




