CHAPTER XII. THE DEATH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.--CHRIST FEEDING FIVE THOUSAND, AND WALKING ON THE LAKE.


1 [14:1]AT that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
[14:2]and said to his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is raised
from the dead; and on that account the mighty works are performed by
him. [14:3]For Herod having seized John, had bound him, and put him in
prison, on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife. [14:4]For
John had said to him, It is not lawful for you to have her. [14:5]And
he wished to kill him; but feared the people, because they regarded him
as a prophet.  [14:6]And Herod's birthday being kept, the daughter of
Herodias danced before them and pleased Herod, [14:7]on account of
which he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask;
[14:8]and she, having been put forward by her mother, said, Give me
here on a plate the head of John the Baptist.

2 [14:9]And the king was sorry; but on account of the oath, and those
reclining with him, he commanded it to be given. [14:10]And he sent and
beheaded John in the prison; [14:11]and his head was brought on a plate
and given to the girl, and she carried it to her mother. [14:12]And his
disciples went and took up the body and buried it, and came and told
Jesus.

3 [14:13]And when Jesus heard of it he departed thence in a ship to a
solitary place by himself. And the multitudes hearing of it followed
him on foot from the cities.

4 [14:14]And going out he saw a great multitude, and had compassion on
them, and cured their sick. [14:15]And when it was evening his
disciples came to him, saying, The place is solitary, and the hour is
already past; dismiss the multitudes that they may go to the villages
and buy themselves food. [14:16]But Jesus said to them, They need not
go away; give them food to eat.  [14:17]And they said to him, We have
here only five loaves and two fishes. [14:18]And he said, Bring them
here to me. [14:19]And commanding the multitudes to sit down on the
grass, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and, looking up to
heaven, blessed them, and having broken them gave the bread to the
disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes. [14:20]And they all eat
and were filled; and they took up the fragments which remained over,
twelve travelling-baskets full; [14:21]and those that eat were about
five thousand men, besides women and children.

5 [14:22]And he immediately constrained the disciples to go into a ship
and go before him to the other side, till he should dismiss the
multitudes. [14:23]And having dismissed the multitudes, he went on a
mountain by himself to pray. And when it was evening he was there
alone. [14:24]But the ship was now in the midst of the lake tossed by
the waves, for the wind was contrary. [14:25]And in the fourth watch of
the night he came to them walking on the lake. [14:26]And when the
disciples saw him walking on the lake, they were troubled and said, It
is an apparition; and they cried out for fear. [14:27]But Jesus
immediately spoke to them, saying, Be of good courage; it is I; be not
afraid. [14:28]And Peter answered and said to him, Lord, if it is you,
command me to come to you on the waters. [14:29]And he said, Come. And
Peter going down from the ship walked on the waters to go to Jesus.
[14:30]But seeing the wind strong he was afraid; and beginning to sink,
cried, saying, Lord save me!  [14:31]and Jesus immediately stretching
out his hand, took hold of him and said, Man of little faith, why did
you doubt?  [14:32]And when they entered into the ship, the wind
ceased; [14:33]and those in the ship came and worshipped him; saying,
Truly you are the Son of God.

6 [14:34]And having crossed over, they came to Gennesaret.  [14:35]And
when the men of that place knew him, they sent to all the country
around, and brought to him all that were sick, [14:36]and requested of
him that they might only touch the fringe of his garment; and as many
as touched it were entirely cured.




