CHAPTER XXII. PAUL'S TRIAL BEFORE FELIX THE PROCURATOR.--A.D. 59, 60.


1 [24:1]AND after five days the chief priest Ananias, with the elders,
and a certain orator, Tertullus, went down and gave information to the
procurator against Paul. [24:2]And he being called, Tertullus began to
accuse him, saying, Having obtained great peace by you, and things
being happily arranged for this nation by your oversight in all things
and in all places [24:3]we accept [it] most excellent Felix, with all
thankfulness.  [24:4]But that I may not further weary you, I beg you to
hear us briefly, with your clemency. [24:5]For finding this man a
pestilence and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the
world, and a chief of the sect of the Nazoraeans, [24:6]who also
endeavored to profane the temple, whom we also took, [24:8]from whom
you will be able to learn by examination of all these things of which
we accuse him. [24:9]And the Jews also assented, saying, These things
are so.

2 [24:10]And the procurator making a sign to him to speak, Paul
answered, Knowing that you have been for many years a judge of this
nation, I shall defend myself cheerfully, [24:11]you being able to know
that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at
Jerusalem. [24:12]And they did not find me in the temple disputing with
any one, or making a disturbance of the multitude, neither in the
synagogues nor in the city; [24:13]neither can they prove the things of
which they now accuse me.

3 [24:14]But this I confess to you, that in the way which they call a
heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers; believing all things
written in the law and the prophets, [24:15]having a hope in God which
they also hold, that there will be a resurrection both of the righteous
and wicked. [24:16]And in this also I endeavor always to have a
conscience without offense towards God and man.

4 [24:17]But after many years I came to bring charities and offerings
to my nation, [24:18]in which certain Jews from Asia found me purified
in the temple, not with a multitude, nor with a tumult, [24:19]who
ought to be present and accuse me before you, if they have any thing
against me. [24:20]Or let them say whether they found any
unrighteousness in me when I stood before the Sanhedrim, [24:21]except
in this one statement which I made, as I stood among them, that I am
under trial by you to-day concerning the resurrection of the dead.

5 [24:22]But Felix put them off, saying, Having learned more accurately
of this way, when Lysias the chiliarch comes down I will decide
concerning your matters, [24:23]and he commanded the centurion that
Paul should be kept, and be freed from bonds, and that he should forbid
none of his friends to serve him.

6 [24:24]And after some days Felix coming with Drusilla his wife, who
was a Jewess, sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in
Christ. [24:25]And as he discoursed of righteousness, and temperance,
and the judgment about to come, Felix being terrified answered, Go for
the present; but when I have time I will call you. [24:26]At the same
time also he hoped that money would be given him by Paul; and on this
account sent for him the oftener, and conversed with him. [24:27]But
after two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and
wishing to gratify the Jews, Felix left Paul bound.




