CHAPTER XXIII. PAUL'S TRIAL BEFORE FESTUS, HIS APPEAL TO CAESAR, AND HIS SUBSEQUENT DEFENSE BEFORE AGRIPPA.--A.D. 61.


1 [25:1]FESTUS therefore coming into the province, after three days
went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem. [25:2]And the chief priests and the
first men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him,
[25:3]asking favor against him, that he would send for him to
Jerusalem, having provided an ambuscade to kill him on the way.
[25:4]Then Festus answered that Paul should be kept at Caesarea, and
that he would go down there shortly; [25:5]and then, he said, the
principal men among you may go down with me; if there is any thing
against this man they may prosecute him. [25:6]And staying with them
not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the
next day, sitting on the tribunal, commanded Paul to be brought.

2 [25:7]And when he had come, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem
stood around him, bringing many and weighty accusations which they
could not prove, [25:8]while Paul maintained in his defense, Neither
against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against
Caesar, have I done any wrong.

3 [25:9]But Festus wishing to gratify the Jews, answered Paul and said,
Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem, and there be tried by me for
these things? [25:10]And Paul said, I stand at the tribunal of Caesar,
where I ought to be tried. I have not injured the Jews, as you also
know very well. [25:11]If indeed I have done wrong or committed any
thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die; but if those things of
which they accuse me are nothing, no man may give me up to them; I
appeal to Caesar. [25:12]Then Festus having conferred with the council
answered, You have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar you shall go.

4 [25:13]But after some days king Agrippa and Bernice came down to
Caesarea to salute Festus. [25:14]And when they had staid there many
days, Festus proposed the case of Paul to the king, saying, There is a
certain man left a prisoner by Felix, [25:15]concerning whom when I was
at Jerusalem the chief priests and elders of the Jews gave me
information, asking judgment against him; [25:16]to whom I answered, It
is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man before the accused
has the accusers face to face, and is allowed an opportunity to defend
himself against the accusation.

5 [25:17]When therefore, they came here, making no delay, the next day
I sat on the tribunal, and ordered the man to be brought;
[25:18]concerning whom his accusers standing up brought no charge of
such things as I supposed, [25:19]but had certain questions with him
concerning their religion, and concerning one Jesus that was dead, who
Paul said was alive. [25:20]Being in doubt on the question concerning
these things, I asked if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and be tried
by me there on these charges. [25:21]But Paul appealing, to be kept for
the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I could send
him to Caesar. [25:22]And Agrippa [said] to Festus, I should like to
hear the man also myself. And he said, To-morrow you shall hear him.

6 [25:23]On the next day, therefore, Agrippa and Bernice coming with
great pomp, and entering into the place of hearing with chiliarchs and
men of distinction in the city, at the command of Festus Paul was
brought. [25:24]And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all the men present
with us, you see this man, of whom all the multitude of the Jews
besought me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying out that he ought no
longer to live. [25:25]But finding that he had done nothing deserving
death, and he having appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send
him. [25:26]But I have nothing certain to write to the sovereign
concerning him, wherefore I have brought him before you, and especially
before you, King Agrippa, that on examination I may have something to
write; [25:27] for it seems to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and
not to signify the charges against him.

7 [26:1]And Agrippa said to Paul, You are permitted to speak for
yourself. Then Paul stretched out his hand and made his defense.
[26:2]I think myself happy, King Agrippa, in being allowed to make my
defense before you to-day in respect to all things of which I am
accused by the Jews, [26:3]especially as you are acquainted with all
the customs and questions of the Jews; wherefore, I beg you to hear me
patiently. [26:4]My mode of life from my childhood, the early part of
it being with my nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews, [26:5]who knew
me from the first, if they would testify, that according to the
strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. [26:6]And now I
stand on trial for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers,
[26:7]which our twelve tribes, serving God continually, day and night,
hope to attain; of this hope, King Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews.
[26:8]Why is it judged by you incredible that God raises the dead?
[26:9]I indeed thought with myself that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus the Nazoraean, [26:10]which I also did at
Jerusalem, and many of the saints I shut up in prison, having received
authority from the chief priests, and when they were killed I gave my
vote against them.  [26:11]And punishing them often in all the
synagogues, I compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad
against them, I pursued them even to cities abroad.

8 [26:12]In which [persecutions] also, going to Damascus with
authority, and a commission from the chief priests, [26:13]at midday I
saw in the way O king, a light from heaven shining around me and those
going with me, exceeding the brightness of the sun; [26:14]and when we
had all fallen on the earth, I heard a voice speaking to me and saying
in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? it is hard
for you to kick against the goads. [26:15]And I said, Who are you,
Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom you persecute. [26:16]But rise
and stand on your feet; for I have appeared to you for this purpose, to
make you a minister and witness both of what you have seen and [of
visions ] in which I will appear to you, [26:17]delivering you from the
people, and the gentiles, to whom I send you [26:18]to open their eyes,
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among
the sanctified by faith in me.  [26:19]Whence, King Agrippa, I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision, [26:20]but preached first to those
at Damascus and Jerusalem, and in all the country of Judea, and to the
gentiles, that they should change their minds and turn to God,
performing works worthy of a change of mind.

9 [26:21]On this account the Jews seized me in the temple and
endeavored to kill me. [26:22]Having obtained therefore help from God,
I have continued to this day, testifying to small and great, saying
nothing but what the prophets and Moses said should take place;
[26:23]that the Christ should suffer, and that he first from the
resurrection of the dead should proclaim light both to the people and
the nations.

10 [26:24]And when Paul had said these words, Festus said with a loud
voice, You are mad, Paul; much learning has driven you to madness.
[26:25]But he said, I am not mad, most excellent Festus, but utter
words of truth and sobriety. [26:26]For the king knows of these things,
before whom I speak freely; for I am persuaded that none of these
things have escaped his notice; for this was not done in a corner.
[26:27]King Agrippa, believe you the prophets? I know that you believe.
[26:28]And Agrippa said to Paul, You almost persuade me to be a
Christian. [26:29]And Paul said, I would to God that not only you but
also all who hear me this day were both almost and altogether such as I
am, except these bonds. [26:30]And the king arose, and the procurator,
and Bernice, and those who sat with them, [26:31]and departing they
conversed with each other, saying, This man has done nothing deserving
death or bonds. [26:32]And Agrippa said to Festus, If he had not
appealed to Caesar, this man might be released.




