CHAPTER XXIV. PAUL'S VOYAGE TO ROME.--A.D. 61, 62.


1 [27:1]AND when it was determined that we should sail to Italy, they
delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion by the name
of Julius, of the cohort of Augustus. [27:2]And going on board of a
ship of Adramyttium, which was about to sail to places in Asia, we set
sail, Aristarchus a Macedonian of Thessalonica being with us; [27:3]and
on the next day we came to Sidon, and Julius treating Paul with
humanity allowed him to go to his friends, and receive attention.

2 [27:4]Proceeding thence we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds
were contrary, [27:5]and sailing through the sea by Cilicia and
Pamphylia we came to Myra in Lycia; [27:6]and the centurion finding
there an Alexandrian ship sailing to Italy, put us into it. [27:7]And
sailing slowly in those days, and scarcely being by Cnidus, the wind
not permitting us [to proceed in a direct course] we sailed under
Crete, by Salmone, [27:8]and sailing by it with difficulty, we came to
a place called Fair Havens, near which is the city Lasea.

3 [27:9]But some time being spent and navigation not being safe,
because the fast had already passed by, Paul advised, [27:10]saying to
them, Men, I see that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not
only of the cargo and ship, but also of our lives. [27:11]But the
centurion believed the master and owner rather than the words spoken by
Paul. [27:12]And the harbor being inconvenient to winter in, the
greater part advised to depart thence, and, if they were able, to come
to Phenice to winter, a harbor of Crete, which opens to the South and
Southwest.

4 [27:13]And the South wind blowing gently, supposing that they had
attained their purpose, setting sail they proceeded along the coast of
Crete. [27:14]But not long after a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon,
rushed against it, [27:15] and the ship being caught and not being able
to bear up against the wind, we gave up, and were borne along.
[27:16]And running a little under the island called Clauda, we with
difficulty became masters of the boat, [27:17]and taking it out they
used helps, under-girding the ship; and fearing lest they should fall
on the shoal, letting down the mast they were driven in that condition.
[27:18]And we being exceedingly pressed with the storm, on the next day
they cast the cargo overboard, [27:19]and on the third day with our own
hands we cast overboard the furniture of the ship. [27:20]And neither
sun nor stars appearing for many days, and no slight storm being upon
us, at last all hope that we should be saved was taken away.

5 [27:21]Then there having been long abstinence from food, Paul stood
up in the midst of them and said, You ought, men, taking my advice, not
to have sailed from Crete, and to have saved this injury and loss.
[27:22]And now I advise you to be of good courage; for there shall be
no loss of a life of you, but only of the ship. [27:23]For an angel of
the God whose I am, and whom I serve, came to me this night [27:24]and
said, Fear not, Paul; you must stand before Caesar, and behold, God has
given you all that sail with you. [27:25]Wherefore, men, be of good
courage; for I believe God, that it will be as he has told me; [27:26]
but we must be cast on a certain island.

6 [27:27]And on the fourteenth night, when we were borne along in the
Adriatic, at about midnight the sailors suspected that some land was
approaching them. [27:28]And sounding they found twenty fathoms, and
going a little distance and sounding again they found fifteen fathoms;
[27:29]and fearing lest we should fall on rough places, casting out
four anchors from the stern, they prayed for day. [27:30]And the
sailors seeking to escape from the ship, and letting down the boat into
the sea, with the pretence that they were about to put out anchors from
the fore part of the ship, [27:31]Paul said to the centurion and
soldiers, Unless these continue in the ship you cannot be saved.
[27:32]Then the soldiers cut the ropes of the boat and let it fall off.

7 [27:33]And when day was about to appear, Paul exhorted all to take
food, saying, It is the fourteenth day to-day that you have watched and
continued without food, taking nothing.  [27:34]Wherefore I exhort you
to partake of food; for this is necessary to your safety, for there
shall not a hair perish from the head of any one of you. [27:35]And
having said these things, and taken bread, he thanked God before all,
and having broken began to eat. [27:36]And all being in good spirits
they also partook of food; [27:37]and all the souls in the ship were
two hundred and seventy-six. [27:38]And being satisfied with food they
lightened the ship, casting the wheat into the sea.

8 [27:39]And when it was day they did not know the land, but they
perceived a bay having a shore, on which they wished if possible to
thrust the ship. [27:40] And taking up the anchors, they committed [the
ship] to the sea, loosening at the same time the fastenings of the
rudder and raising the top sail to the wind, they bore down towards the
shore. [27:41]And falling on a place with a sea on both sides, they run
the ship aground. And the bow being firmly fixed, remained immoveable;
and the stern was broken by violence.

9 [27:42]And the design of the soldiers was to kill the prisoners, that
none might escape by swimming; [27:43]but the centurion wishing to save
Paul, prohibited them from this design, and commanded those able to
swim to cast themselves into the water first, and go to the land;
[27:44]and the rest, some on boards, and some on parts of the ship; and
in this way all were brought safely to land.

10 [28:1]And when they were saved, they learned that the island was
called Melita. [28:2]And the barbarians showed us no ordinary humanity;
for kindling a fire they received us all, on account of the rain which
was falling, and the cold. [28:3]And Paul having collected a bundle of
sticks and put them on the fire, a viper coming out from the heat
fastened on his hand. [28:4]And when the barbarians saw the creature
hanging from his hand, they said one to another, This man is
undoubtedly a murderer, whom though saved from the sea justice has not
permitted to live. [28:5]Then shaking off the creature into the fire he
suffered no harm; [28:6]but they expected that he would swell up, or
suddenly fall down dead. And waiting a long time, and seeing nothing
extraordinary happen to him, they thought differently, and said, He is
a god.

11 [28:7]Near that place were the lands of the first man in the island,
whose name was Poplius, who received and entertained us kindly three
days. [28:8]And the father of Poplius lay sick with a fever and
dysentery, and Paul came to him, and prayed, and put his hands on him,
and cured him. [28:9]And this being done, the rest also who had
sicknesses in the island came and were cured, [28:10]and they bestowed
on us many rewards, and when we left supplied us with things that we
needed.

12 [28:11]And after three months we sailed away in an Alexandrian
vessel, that had wintered in the island, with the sign of Castor and
Pollux. [28:12]And coming to Syracuse we remained there three days;
[28:13]and proceeding thence we came to Rhegium, and after one day, a
south wind blowing, we came the second day to Puteoli, [28:14]where
finding brothers we were invited to remain with them seven days; and
thus we came to Rome. [28:15]And thence, the brothers hearing of us
came out to meet us even to the Forum of Appius, and the Three Taverns
[fifty-one miles]; and when Paul saw them, thanking God he took courage.




