CHAPTER XXV. PAUL AT ROME.--A.D. 62, 64.


1 [28:16]AND when we came to Rome the centurion committed the prisoners
to the prefect of the camp, and Paul was allowed to remain by himself,
with a soldier to guard him. [28:17]And after three days he called the
chief men of the Jews together; and when they had convened, said to
them, Men and brothers, having done nothing contrary to the people or
to the customs of the fathers, I was delivered up from Jerusalem a
prisoner into the hands of the Romans, [28:18]who on trial wished to
release me, because they found no cause of death in me; [28:19]but the
Jews opposing it I was compelled to appeal to Caesar; not that I have
any thing of which to accuse my nation. [28:20]For this reason,
therefore, I have called you to see and converse with you, because I am
loaded with this chain on account of the hope of Israel.

2 [28:21]And they said to him, We have neither received letters
concerning you from Judea, nor has any one of the brothers come and
reported or told any evil of you. [28:22]But we would like to hear from
you what you think, for it is known to us concerning this sect, that it
is everywhere spoken against.

3 [28:23]And appointing him a day they came in great numbers to his
lodging, to whom he set forth and testified the kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus both from the law of Moses and the
prophets, from morning till evening. [28:24]And some believed the
things which were spoken, and others believed not; [28:25]and
disagreeing among themselves they were dismissed by Paul, saying one
word; Well did the Holy Spirit speak by Isaiah the prophet to our
fathers, [28:26]saying, Go to this people and say, Hearing you shall
hear and not understand, and seeing you shall see and not perceive;
[28:27]for the heart of this people has become hard, and they hear
imperfectly with their ears, and they have shut their eyes, lest at any
time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and turn, and I should cure them.
[28:28]Be it known to you, therefore, that the salvation of God is sent
to the gentiles, and they will hear it.

4 [28:30]But Paul continued two entire years in his hired house, and
received all who came to him, [28:31]preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching the doctrines concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all
boldness and without hindrance.





