THE EPISTLES OF PAUL. FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. CHAPTER I. THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GOSPEL TO THE THESSALONIANS, TIMOTHY'S VISIT AND REPORT, ETC.

CORINTH, A.D. 53. (ACTS 16, 3.) 

1 [1:1]PAUL and Sylvanus [Silas] and Timothy to the church of the
Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be to
you and peace.

2 [1:2]We thank God always for you all, making mention of you in our
prayers, [1:3]remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor
of love and patience of the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ before God
even our Father, [1:4] knowing, brothers beloved by God, your election,
[1:5]that our gospel came not to you in word only, but with power and
with the Holy Spirit and with full assurance, as you know what we were
among you for your sakes.

3 [1:6]And you became followers of us and of the Lord, having received
the word in much affliction with the joy of the Holy Spirit, [1:7]so
that you became an example to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.
[1:8]For from you the word of the Lord was proclaimed not only in
Macedonia and Achaia, but your faith with respect to God went into
every place, so that we had no need to say any thing; [1:9]for they
declare of us what introduction we had to you, and how you turned from
idols to God, to serve the living and true God, [1:10]and to wait for
his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus, who delivers
us from the wrath to come.

4 [2:1]For you know, brothers, our introduction to you that it was not
in vain, [2:2]but having suffered before, and been injuriously treated,
as you know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak to you the
gospel of God with much contention.  [2:3]For our exhortation was not
of error, nor of impurity, nor with deceit, [2:4]but as we were judged
worthy by God to be intrusted with the gospel so we speak, not as
pleasing men, but God who tries our hearts. [2:5]For we used at no time
a word of flattery, as you know, nor a pretext for covetousness, God is
witness, [2:6]neither did we seek glory of men, either of you or of
others, when we might have been burdensome as apostles of Christ;
[2:7]but we were gentle among you, as a nurse would cherish her own
children; [2:8]so being greatly desirous of you, we were well pleased
to impart to you not only the gospel of God, but our own souls, because
you were dear to us. [2:9]For you remember, brothers, our labor and
weariness; that working night and day not to be burdensome to any one
of you, we preached to you the gospel of God. [2:10]You are witnesses,
and God, how piously, and righteously, and blamelessly we were with you
that believe, [2:11]as you know how we exhorted and comforted you, as a
father each one of his own children, [2:12]and charged you to walk
worthily of God who calls you into his kingdom and glory.

5 [2:13]For this cause also we thank God without ceasing, that
receiving the word of God heard from us, you received not a word of
men, but, as it is in truth, a word of God, who also works in you that
believe. [2:14]For you, brothers, became followers of the churches of
God in Christ Jesus which were in Judea, for you also suffered the same
things from your countrymen, which they did from the Jews [2:15]who
also killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and persecuted us, and who
please not God and are hostile to all men, [2:16] forbidding us to
speak to the gentiles that they may be saved, that they may fill up
their sins always; and the wrath has come on them to the utmost.

6 [2:17]But we, brothers, being deprived of you for a short time in
presence, not in heart, used greater diligence to see your face, with
much desire. [2:18] For which reason we wished to come to you; I Paul
indeed once and again, and Satan hindered us.  [2:19]For what is our
hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Is it not even you before our Lord
Jesus at his coming? [2:20]For you are our glory and joy.

7 [3:1]When therefore we could no longer refrain, we thought it best to
be left alone at Athens, [3:2]and sent Timothy, our brother and God's
co-laborer in the gospel of Christ, to confirm you and to exhort you in
behalf of your faith, [3:3]that no one should be moved by these
afflictions. For you know that we are appointed for this; [3:4]for
indeed when we came to you, we told you before that we were about to
suffer affliction, as it also happened, and you know. [3:5]For this
reason, being no longer able to forbear, I sent to know your faith,
lest in some way the tempter should have tempted you, and our labor be
in vain.

8 [3:6]But now Timothy having come to us from you and told us the good
news of your faith and love, and that you have a good remembrance of us
always, desiring to see us, as we also you, [3:7]therefore we were
comforted, brothers, on your account in all our affliction and distress
by your faith, [3:8]for now we live, if you stand firm in the Lord.
[3:9]For what thanksgiving can we render to God for you for all the joy
with which we rejoice on your account before our God, [3:10]desiring
exceedingly, night and day, to see your face, and to perfect what is
lacking of your faith?

9 [3:11]And may God himself, even our Father, and our Lord Jesus direct
our way to you; [3:12]and the Lord cause you to be full and abound with
love one to another and to all men, as we also to you, [3:13]to confirm
your hearts without blame in holiness before God, even our Father, at
the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.




