CHAPTER II. CHASTITY, BROTHERLY LOVE, THE STATE OF THE DEAD, THE COMING OF CHRIST, ETC.


1 [4:1]FINALLY, therefore, brothers, we beseech and exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, as you have received from us how you ought to walk and
please God, that you abound still more. [4:2]For you know what
commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. [4:3]For this is the will
of God, your purity, that you should abstain from fornication,
[4:4]that each one should know how to have his wife in purity and
honor, [4:5]not with inordinate desires like the gentiles who know not
God, [4:6]that he should not go beyond and defraud his brother in the
matter, because the Lord is a punisher of all these, as we also told
you before and fully testified. [4:7]For God has not called us to
impurity, but to purity. [4:8]He therefore that despises, despises not
man, but God, who also gives us his Holy Spirit.

2 [4:9]But concerning brotherly love, you have no need that I should
write to you; for you are taught by God to love one another; [4:10]for
you also do the same to all the brothers in all Macedonia. But we
exhort you, brothers, to abound still more, [4:11]and strive to be
quiet and pursue your own business, and work with your hands, as we
charged you, [4:12]that you may walk becomingly towards those without
and have need of nothing.

3 [4:13]And we wish you not to be ignorant, brothers, concerning those
that have fallen asleep, that you may not grieve as others who have no
hope. [4:14] For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so also
will God bring with him those that have fallen asleep on account of
Jesus. [4:15]For we tell you this by the word of the Lord, that we who
live and remain till the coming of the Lord, shall not anticipate those
that have fallen asleep, [4:16]for the Lord himself will descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of an archangel, and with the
trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, [4:17] then we
the living who remain shall be caught up together with them in clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air; and so we shall be always with the Lord.
[4:18] Comfort one another, therefore, with these words.

4 [5:1]But concerning the times and season, brothers, you have no need
that I should write to you; [5:2]for you yourselves know perfectly that
the day of the Lord comes like a thief in the night. [5:3]When they
say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes, like pain upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape. [5:4]But you, brothers,
are not in darkness, that the day should come upon you like a thief;
[5:5]for you are all children of light, and children of day; we are not
of night nor of darkness.

5 [5:6]Therefore let us not sleep as others, but let us watch and be
sober. [5:7]For they that sleep sleep in the night, and they that are
drunk drink in the night; [5:8]but let us who are of day be sober,
putting on a cuirass of faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of
salvation, [5:9]for God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, [5:10] who died for us, that,
whether we wake or sleep, we may live together with him.
[5:11]Wherefore exhort one another, and edify one another, as you also
do.

6 [5:12]And we beseech you, brothers, to know those who labor among
you, and preside over you in the Lord and admonish you, [5:13]and to
esteem them very highly in love on account of their work. Be at peace
among yourselves. [5:14] And we exhort you, brothers, admonish the
disorderly, comfort the dispirited, assist the sick, be of long
suffering towards all men. [5:15]See that no one renders evil for evil,
but always pursue the good both one to another and to all.

7 [5:16]Rejoice always; [5:17]pray without ceasing, [5:18]give thanks
on every occasion; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus to us.
[5:19]Quench not the Spirit, [5:20]despise not prophecies. [5:21]Prove
all things, hold fast the good; [5:22]abstain from every form of evil.
[5:23]And may the God of peace himself purify you wholly, and your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless at the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. [5:24]Faithful is he that calls you, who will
also perform.

8 [5:25]Brothers, pray for us. [5:26]Salute all the brothers with a
holy kiss. [5:27]I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read to
all the holy brothers. [5:28]The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you.





