SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. CHAPTER I. PAUL'S LOVE AND PRAYERS FOR THE THESSALONIAN CHRISTIANS, THE COMING OF CHRIST, ETC.


CORINTH, A.D. 53. (ACTS, 16:3.)

1 [1:1]PAUL and Silvanus [Silas] and Timothy, to the church of the
Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.  [1:2]Grace
be to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 [1:3]We ought to thank God always for you, brothers, as is fit,
because your faith increases greatly, and the love of every one of you
all one for another abounds, [1:4]so that we boast of you in the
churches of God, of your patience and faith, in all your persecutions
and the afflictions which you endure, [1:5] a token of the righteous
judgment of God that you should be deemed worthy of the kingdom of God,
for which you also suffer, [1:6]since it is just with God to repay
affliction to those who afflict you, [1:7]and to you who are afflicted
rest with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his
mighty angels [1:8]in a flame of fire, executing judgment on all that
know not God and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus; [1:9]who shall
suffer the punishment of eternal destruction from the presence of the
Lord and from the glory of his power, [1:10]when he shall come to be
glorified in his saints and to be admired by all that believe in that
day, for our testimony was believed by you. [1:11] For which also we
pray always for you, that our God will account you worthy of the
calling, and accomplish all the good pleasure of [his] goodness and the
work of faith with power; [1:12]that the name of our Lord Jesus may be
glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 [2:1]And we beseech you, brothers, in respect to the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and our being brought together to him, [2:2]that you
be not soon shaken in mind, nor terrified, neither by a spirit, nor by
a discourse, nor by an epistle as from us, as though the day of the
Lord was at hand. [2:3]Let no one deceive you in any way, for [he shall
not come] unless the apostacy comes first, and the man of sin is
revealed, the son of destruction, [2:4]who opposes and exalts himself
above every thing that is called a god or an object of worship, so that
he sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. [2:5]Do
you not remember that when I was with you I told you of these things?
[2:6]And now you know what hinders him from being revealed in his time.
[2:7]For the mystery of wickedness already works, [God] only restrains
it just now, till it shall be out of the way; [2:8]and then shall the
wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the breath of
his mouth and destroy with the brightness of his coming, [2:9]whose
coming is according to the power of Satan, with all power and miracles
and false prodigies [2:10]and with every unrighteous deceit among those
who are destroyed, because they received not the love of the truth that
they might be saved. [2:11]And therefore, God sends them a power of
delusion that they should believe a lie, [2:12]that they all may be
condemned who believe not the truth but have pleasure in wickedness.

4 [2:13]But we ought to thank God always for you, brothers beloved by
the Lord, because God from the beginning chose you to salvation by
purification of spirit, and belief of the truth, [2:14]to which he
called you by our gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
[2:15]Therefore, brothers, stand firm, and hold the traditions which
you have been taught, whether by word or by our epistle; [2:16]and our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father, who has loved us and
given us eternal consolation and a good hope by grace, [2:17] comfort
and confirm your hearts in every good work and word.

5 [3:1]Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may
run and be glorified, as also with you, [3:2]and that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all have not faith.
[3:3]But the Lord is faithful, who will confirm you, and guard you from
evil. [3:4]And we trust in the Lord with respect to you, that you both
do and will do what we direct. [3:5] And may the Lord direct your
hearts in the love of God, and in the patience of Christ.

6 [3:6]And we charge you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to withdraw from every brother who walks disorderly and not
according to the tradition which you received from us.  [3:7]For you
know yourselves how you ought to follow us, for we walked not
disorderly among you, [3:8]neither did we eat bread of any one for
nought, but worked with labor and fatigue, night and day, not to be
burdensome to any of you; [3:9]not that we have not a right [to a
support], but that we may make ourselves an example for you to follow
us. [3:10]For when we were with you, we gave you this charge, that if
any one will not work, neither let him eat. [3:11]For we hear that some
go about among you in a disorderly manner, not working, but being above
work; [3:12]we charge and exhort such, by our Lord Jesus Christ, to
work quietly, and eat their own bread. [3:13]But, brothers, be not
weary of well doing. [3:14]But if any one obeys not our word by this
epistle, mark that one, and have no association with him, that he may
be ashamed; [3:15]and account him not as an enemy, but admonish him as
a brother. [3:16]And may the Lord of peace give you peace always in
every way. The Lord be with you all.

7 [3:17]The salutation by my hand, Paul's, which is [the] sign in every
epistle; so I write. [3:18]The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you all.










