EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. CHAPTER I. PAUL'S ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF AND OF THE GOSPEL.

EPHESUS, A.D. 56. (ACTS, 17:3.)


1 [1:1]PAUL an apostle, not from men nor by man but by Jesus Christ and
God the Father who raised him from the dead, [1:2]and all the brothers
with me, to the churches of Galatia. [1:3]Grace be to you and peace
from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, [1:4]who gave himself
for our sins, that he might deliver us from the present evil life
according to the will of God even our Father, [1:5] to whom be the
glory forever and ever; amen.

2 [1:6]I wonder that you have so quickly turned away from him that
called you in the grace of Christ to another gospel, [1:7]which is not
another; but there are some who disturb you and wish to subvert the
gospel of Christ. [1:8]But if we or an angel from heaven preach you
another gospel contrary to what we have preached you let him be
accursed. [1:9]As we said before I now also say again, If any one
preaches you a gospel contrary to what you have received let him be
accursed. [1:10]For do I now obey man, or God? or do I seek to please
men? For if I yet pleased men, I could not have been a servant of
Christ.

3 [1:11]For I certify you, brothers, of the gospel preached by me, that
it is not according to man; [1:12]for I neither received it from man
nor was I taught it, but by a revelation of Jesus Christ. [1:13]For you
heard of my conduct formerly in Judaism, that I greatly persecuted the
church of God and destroyed it; [1:14]and was a proficient in Judaism
beyond many of my age among my people, being more exceedingly zealous
for the traditions of my fathers. [1:15] But when God who gave me being
and called me by his grace, [1:16]was pleased to reveal his Son in me,
that I might preach him among the gentiles, immediately I conferred not
with flesh and blood, [1:17]neither did I go to Jerusalem to those who
were apostles before me, but I went to Arabia and returned again to
Damascus.

4 [1:18]Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas,
and staid with him fifteen days; [1:19]and I saw no other of the
apostles except James, the Lord's brother. [1:20]And what I write to
you, behold, before God, I lie not.

5 [1:21]Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.  [1:22]But I
was unknown by face to the churches of Christ in Judea, [1:23]only they
heard that he who persecuted us formerly, now preached the faith which
he formerly destroyed; [1:24]and they glorified God in me.

6 [2:1]Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with
Barnabas, taking also Titus; [2:2]and I went up by a revelation, and
proposed to them the gospel which I preach to the gentiles, but
privately to persons of distinction, lest I should run or had run in
vain. [2:3]But Titus who was with me, and was a Greek, was not
compelled to be circumcised; [2:4]but on account of false brothers
brought in secretly to act as spies against our liberty which we have
in Christ Jesus, to bring us into servitude, [2:5]we did not yield to
them by subjection, for an hour, that the truth of the gospel might
continue with you.  [2:6]But from those of distinction, whatever they
were it makes no difference to me,--God is partial to no man,--for
those of distinction added nothing to me, [2:7]but on the contrary
seeing that I was intrusted with the gospel of the uncircumcision, as
Peter was of the circumcision,-- [2:8]for he that operated in Peter for
the apostleship of the circumcision, operated also in me for the
gentiles,-- [2:9]and knowing the grace given me, James and Cephas and
John, who were manifest pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand
of fellowship that we should go to the gentiles and they to the
circumcision; [2:10]only [they wished] that we should remember the
poor, which I was also forward to do.

7 [2:11]But when Peter came to Antioch I opposed him to his face,
because he was to blame. [2:12]For before some came from James he eat
with the gentiles; but when they came, he withdrew and separated
himself; fearing those of the circumcision; [2:13]and the other Jews
also dissembled with him, so that Barnabas was carried away with their
dissimulation. [2:14]But when I saw that they walked not correctly,
according to the truth of the gospel, I said to Peter before all, If
you being a Jew live after the manner of the gentiles, and not after
the manner of the Jews, why do you compel the gentiles to practise
Judaism? [2:15]For we Jews by race and not sinners of the gentiles,
[2:16] knowing that a man is not justified by works of the law but by
the faith of Jesus Christ, we also have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we may be justified by faith and not by works of the law, because by
works of the law shall no flesh be justified. [2:17]But if seeking to
be justified by Christ we are found to be ourselves also sinners, is
Christ then a minister of sin? By no means.  [2:18] For if I build up
again what I have destroyed, I make myself a transgressor. [2:19]For by
a law I have died to the law, that I may live to God. [2:20]I am
crucified with Christ; and I no longer live myself, but Christ lives in
me; and the present life which I live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. [2:21]I do not
reject the grace of God; for if rightousness is through the law, then
Christ died for nothing.




