CHAPTER II. RIGHTEOUSNESS EXPLAINED.


1 [3:1]O FOOLISH Galatians, who has fascinated you, before whose eyes
Jesus Christ has been set forth among you crucified?  [3:2]This only
would I learn of you. Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law,
or by a hearing of faith? [3:3]Are you so foolish? Having begun in the
Spirit do you now end in the flesh?  [3:4]Have you suffered so much in
vain? if indeed also it is in vain. [3:5]He then that imparts to you
the Spirit, and exercises miraculous powers among you, does he do it by
works of the law, or by the doctrine of faith? [3:6] As Abraham
believed God and it was accounted to him a righteousness.

2 [3:7]Know, therefore, that those of faith, these are children of
Abraham. [3:8]And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
nations by faith, promised before to Abraham, In you shall all the
nations be blessed. [3:9]Those of faith, therefore, are blessed with
believing Abraham. [3:10]For as many as are of works of the law are
under a curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things written in the book of the law to do them. [3:11]And
it is evident that no one is justified by the law before God, because
the just shall live by faith, [3:12]but the law is not of faith, but he
that does these things shall live by them. [3:13]Christ redeemed us
from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us, for it is
written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree, [3:14]that the
blessing of Abraham may come on the nations, in Christ Jesus, that we
may receive the promise of the Spirit through the faith.

3 [3:15]Brothers, I speak according to man. But no one abolishes a
man's covenant when it is established, or makes additions to it.
[3:16]The promises were spoken to Abraham and his offspring.  He said
not, And to offsprings, as of many, but as of one, And to your
offspring, which is Christ. [3:17]And this I say; that the law which
was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot abrogate the covenant
previously established by God, to make the promise of no effect.
[3:18]For if the inheritance is by the law, it is no longer by the
promise. But God gave it to Abraham by the promise. [3:19]What then?
The law was added on account of transgressions, till the offspring
should come to which the promise was made, being appointed by angels by
the hand of a mediator. [3:20]But there is no mediator of one; but God
is one.

4 [3:21]Is the law then against the promises of God? By no means.  For
if a law had been given, able to give life, righteousness would really
have been by the law; [3:22]but the Scripture has shut up all under
sin, that the promise of the faith of Jesus Christ may be given to them
that believe. [3:23]But before the faith came, we were kept shut up
under the law for the faith to be revealed. [3:24]So that the law was
our schoolmaster to lead to Christ, that we might be justified by
faith; [3:25]but the faith having come, we are no longer under a
schoolmaster.  [3:26]For you are all children of God by the faith in
Jesus Christ; [3:27]for as many of you as are baptized in Christ, have
put on Christ. [3:28]There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
servant nor freeman, there is neither male nor female; for you are all
one in Christ Jesus. [3:29] And if you are of Christ, then are you
Abraham's children and heirs according to the promise.

5 [4:1]But I say, that as long as the heir is a child, he differs not
from a servant, though he is lord of all, [4:2]but is under tutors and
stewards till the time appointed by the father.  [4:3]So also we, when
we were children, were in servitude under the rudiments of the world;
[4:4]but when the fullness of time came, God sent forth his Son, born
of a woman, born under the law, [4:5] that he might redeem those under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. [4:6]And because
you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. [4:7]So that you are no longer a servant,
but a son; and if a son, also an heir of God.

6 [4:8]But formerly, not knowing God you served beings which are not
really Gods; [4:9]but now knowing God, or rather being known by God,
how do you turn again to the weak and imperfect rudiments, which you
wish again to serve? [4:10] Do you observe days, and months, and times,
and years? [4:11]I am afraid of you, lest I have expended labor on you
in vain.

7 [4:12]I beseech you, brothers, be as I am, for I am as you [ought to
be]. You did not injure me; [4:13]but you knew I preached the gospel to
you on my former [visit] in weakness of the flesh, [4:14]and my trial
in my flesh you despised not nor rejected, but received me as an angel
of God, as Christ Jesus.  [4:15] What then was your blessedness? For I
bear you witness that, if possible, you would have dug out your eyes
and have given them to me. [4:16]Have I therefore become your enemy, by
telling you the truth? [4:17]They are zealous for you, but not well,
but they wish to exclude you that you may be zealous for them. [4:18]It
is good to be zealous for a good object always, and not only when I am
present with you. [4:19]My little children, with whom I am again in
pain till Christ is formed in you, [4:20]I wish to be present with you
now and change my voice with you, for I am in doubt of you.

8 [4:21]Tell me, you that wish to be under the law, do you not hear the
law? [4:22]For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, one by a
servant woman, and the other by a free woman. [4:23]But he by the
servant woman was born of the flesh, and he by the free woman, by the
promise. [4:24]These things are allegorical, for those [women] are two
covenants, one from Mount Sinai, bearing children for servitude, which
is Hagar; [4:25]for Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia; and the present
Jerusalem answers to her, for she is in servitude with her children.
[4:26]But the Jerusalem above is free, which is the mother of us;
[4:27]for it is written, Rejoice, barren woman, that did not bear,
break forth and cry, woman that had no pain, for the children of the
desolate are more numerous than those of her who had a husband.
[4:28]But we, brothers, like Isaac, are children of the promise.
[4:29]But as then he that was born of the flesh persecuted him that was
born of the Spirit, so also now. [4:30]But what says the Scripture?
Cast out the servant-woman and her son; for the son of the servant
woman shall not be an heir, with the son of the free.  [4:31]Wherefore,
brothers, we are not children of the servant woman, but of the free.




