CHAPTER III. MORAL DUTIES.


1 [5:1]STAND firm in the liberty with which Christ has made you free,
and be not again subject to a yoke of servitude.  [5:2]Behold, I Paul
tell you, that if you are circumcised Christ will not profit you.
[5:3]For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is
bound to perform the whole law. [5:4] You have departed from Christ,
whoever of you are justified by the law, you have fallen from the
grace. [5:5]For we wait in spirit for the hope of righteousness, by
faith. [5:6]For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing
nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

2 [5:7]You ran well; who hindered you from obeying the truth?
[5:8]This persuasion is not of him that calls you. [5:9]A little leaven
leavens the whole mass. [5:10]I have confidence in you, in the Lord,
that you will not be of another mind; but he that troubles you shall
bear his sin, whoever he is. [5:11] And I, brothers, if I preach
circumcision, why am I yet persecuted? Then has the offense of the
cross ceased. [5:12]I would that they were cut off that disturb you.
[5:13]For you are called to liberty, brothers, only make not your
liberty an occasion for the flesh, but by love serve one another.
[5:14]For all the law is fully contained in one precept; you shall love
your neighbor as yourself. [5:15]But if you bite and devour one
another, see that you be not consumed one by another.

3 [5:16]And I say, walk in the Spirit and perform not the desire of the
flesh. [5:17]For the flesh desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; and these are opposed one to another, so that you do
not what you wish. [5:18]But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not
under the law. [5:19]For the works of the flesh are manifest, which
are, fornication, impurity, lewdness, [5:20]idolatry, magic, enmities,
strife, envy, anger, contentions, dissensions, heresies, [5:21]murders,
drunkenness, revellings and the like, of which I tell you before, as I
have also previously told you, that those who do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. [5:22]But the fruit of the Spirit is love,
joy, peace, long suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, [5:23]meekness,
temperance; against such there is no law.  [5:24]And the [subjects] of
Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its affections and desires.
[5:25]If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
[5:26]Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another.

4 [6:1]Brothers, if a man is overtaken with any fault, do you that are
spiritual restore such a one with a spirit of meekness, considering
yourself; lest you also be tried. [6:2]Bear one another's burdens, and
so perform the law of Christ. [6:3]For if any one thinks he is
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. [6:4]But let each
one prove his work, and then shall he have joy in himself alone and not
in another, [6:5]for every one shall bear his own burden.

5 [6:6]Let him that is taught the word communicate with him that
teaches of all good things. [6:7]Be not deceived, God is not mocked.
For what a man sows, that shall he also reap; [6:8]for he that sows for
his flesh, shall of the flesh reap destruction; but he that sows for
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life eternal. [6:9]Let us not be
weary of well doing; for in due season we shall reap if we faint not.
[6:10]As we have opportunity, therefore, let us do good to all, but
especially to the members of the family of the faith.

6 [6:11]You see with how long a letter I have written to you.
[6:12]Those who wish to make a fair appearance in the flesh compel you
to be circumcised, only that they may not be persecuted for the cross
of Christ. [6:13]For the circumcised themselves do not keep the law,
but they wish you to be circumcised that they may glory in your flesh.
[6:14]But far be it from me to glory, except in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me and I to the world.
[6:15]For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creation. [6:16]And whoever walk by this
rule, peace and mercy be on them, and on the Israel of God.

7 [6:17]Finally, let no man trouble me; for I bear in my body the marks
of Jesus. [6:18]The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit,
brothers; amen.





