FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. CHAPTER I. SALUTATION, EXHORTATION TO UNITY, THE MYSTERY OF THE GOSPEL, ETC.

EPHESUS, A.D. 57. (ACTS, 19:10.)

1 [1:1]PAUL, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of
God, and Sosthenes the brother, [1:2]to the church of God which is at
Corinth, to the sanctified in Jesus Christ, called to be saints, with
all that call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, both
theirs and ours. [1:3]Grace and peace be to you from God our Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 [1:4]I thank my God always for you, for the grace of God given you in
Christ Jesus, [1:5]that in every thing you are enriched in him, in all
speech and all knowledge, [1:6]as the testimony of Christ was confirmed
in you, [1:7]so that you are behind in no gift, waiting for the
revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, [1:8]who also will confirm you to
the end, without blame, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. [1:9]God
is faithful by whom you are called into the society of his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

3 [1:10]I exhort you, brothers, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that you be perfected in the same mind and the same will.
[1:11]For I have been informed of you, my brothers, by the family of
Chloe, that there are contentions among you. [1:12]I mean this; that
each one of you says I indeed am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ.  [1:13]Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified
for you? or were you baptized in the name of Paul? [1:14]I thank God I
baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius; [1:15]that no one may
say that I baptized in my name. [1:16]And I also baptized the family of
Stephanus; besides I do not know that I baptized any other.  [1:17]For
Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the good news, not with a
wisdom of speech lest the cross of Christ should be without effect.
[1:18]For the word of the cross is to the lost foolishness, but to the
saved the power of God. [1:19]For it is written, I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the
intelligent. [1:20]Where is the wise? where the scribe? where the
disputer of this life? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the
world? [1:21]For since, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew
not God, God was pleased by the foolishness of preaching to save those
that believe; [1:22]and since the Jews seek signs, and the Greeks seek
wisdom, [1:23]we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews indeed an
offense, and to the gentiles foolishness, [1:24]but to the called, both
Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and wisdom of God; [1:25]for
the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
stronger than men. [1:26]For you see your calling, brothers, that not
many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble [are
called]; [1:27]but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world has God chosen to
put to shame the mighty, [1:28]and the ignoble things of the world and
things that are despised has God chosen, and things that are not, to
destroy things that are, [1:29]that no flesh may glory in the sight of
God. [1:30]But you are of him in Christ Jesus, who has become to us
wisdom from God, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption,
[1:31]that as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

4 [2:1]And when I came to you, brothers, I came not with excellency of
speech, or wisdom, declaring to you the mystery of God. [2:2]For I
determined to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and him
crucified. [2:3]And I was with you in weakness, and with fear and with
much trembling, [2:4]and my speech and my preaching were not with
persuasive words of wisdom, but with a demonstration of the spirit and
power, [2:5]that your faith might not be in the wisdom of men but in
the power of God.

5 [2:6]But we speak wisdom among the perfect, but not the wisdom of
this life, nor of the rulers of this life, who are destroyed; [2:7]but
we speak a wisdom of God hid in mystery, which God appointed from
eternity for our glory, [2:8] which none of the rulers of this life
knew, for if they had known they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory; [2:9]but as it is written, An eye has not seen, an ear has not
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God
has prepared for those that love him; [2:10]but God has revealed them
to us by his Spirit.  For the Spirit searches all things, even the
depths of God.  [2:11]For who knows the [things] of man, except the
spirit of man which is in him? So also no one knows the [things] of God
except the Spirit of God. [2:12]And we have received not the spirit of
the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things
given us by God, [2:13]which we also speak, not in words taught by
human wisdom, but in those taught by the Spirit, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual. [2:14]But the natural man receives not the
[things] of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, and he
cannot know them, for they are spiritually discerned. [2:15]But the
spiritual man discerns all things, and is himself perceived by no one.
[2:16] For who has known the mind of the Lord, who shall instruct him?
But we have the mind of Christ.

6 [3:1]And I, brothers, was not able to speak to you as spiritual, but
as carnal, as babes in Christ. [3:2]I have fed you milk, not solid
food; for you were not yet able; but you are not able even now;
[3:3]for you are yet carnal. For when there is envy and strife among
you are you not carnal and walk as men?  [3:4]For when one says, I am
of Paul, and another, I, of Apollos, are you not men? [3:5]Who then is
Apollos? and who is Paul? but ministers by whom you believed, and to
each as the Lord gave.  [3:6]I planted, Apollos watered, but God caused
[the seed] to grow; [3:7]so neither is he that plants any thing, nor he
that waters, but God that causes it to grow. [3:8]He that plants and he
that waters are one; and each shall receive his reward according to his
labor. [3:9] For we are God's co-laborers; you are God's field, God's
building.

7 [3:10]According to the grace of God given me as a wise architect I
have laid a foundation, and another builds on it. But let each one see
how he builds on it. [3:11]For no one can lay another foundation
besides that laid, which is Christ Jesus.  [3:12]And if any man builds
on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, grass, reeds,
[3:13]each one's work shall be manifest; for the day shall show it,
because it shall be revealed by fire, and the same fire shall try every
man's work what it is. [3:14]If any one's work continues which he has
built, he shall receive a reward; [3:15]if any one's work is consumed,
he shall suffer loss, and he shall be saved, but so as by fire.

8 [3:16]Know you not that you are a temple of God and the Spirit of God
dwells in you? [3:17]If any one destroys the temple of God, him shall
God destroy; for the temple of God which you are is holy. [3:18]Let no
one deceive himself; if any one seems to be wise among you in this
life, let him be a fool, that he may be wise. [3:19]For the wisdom of
this world is foolishness with God.  For it is written; He takes the
wise in their craftiness.  [3:20]And again; The Lord knows the thoughts
of the wise that they are vain. [3:21]Let no one therefore glory in
men; for all things are yours, [3:22]whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things
to come, all are yours, [3:23]and you Christ's, and Christ God's.

9 [4:1]Let a man so regard us as servants of Christ and stewards of the
mysteries of God. [4:2]But, moreover, it is required of stewards that
one should be found faithful. [4:3]But it is of little account to me
that I should be judged by you or by man's day [judgment]; but I judge
not myself; [4:4]for I am not conscious to myself [of wrong], but I am
not on this account justified; but he that judges me is the Lord.
[4:5]Judge nothing therefore before the time, till the Lord comes, who
will both bring to light the hidden deeds of darkness, and make known
the purposes of the hearts; and then shall each one have praise from
God.

10 [4:6]I have applied these things figuratively, brothers, to myself
and Apollos on your account, that you may learn by us not to [go
beyond] what is written, that you may not be puffed up for one against
another. [4:7]For who made you to differ? And what have you that you
did not receive? And if you received, why do you boast as one that
receives not? [4:8]You are already full, you are already enriched; you
have reigned without us; and I would that you did reign, that we also
might reign with you.  [4:9]For I think that God has shown us the
apostles last, as devoted to death, for we have been made a spectacle
to the world, both to angels and men. [4:10]For we are foolish for
Christ's sake, but you are wise in Christ; we are weak, but you are
strong; and you are glorious, but we are infamous. [4:11]Even to this
hour we suffer hunger and thirst and nakedness, and are beaten, and are
unsettled, [4:12]and labor, working with our hands; being reviled we
bless, being persecuted we endure, [4:13]being defamed we entreat; we
are made like the offscouring of the world and the vilest of all
things, even till now.

11 [4:14]I write these things not to shame you, but as my beloved
children, I admonish you. [4:15]For if you have ten thousand teachers
in Christ still you have not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you by the gospel. [4:16]I exhort you therefore, be followers
of me. [4:17]For this reason I sent you Timothy, who is my beloved and
faithful son in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways in Christ, as
I teach everywhere, in every church. [4:18]Some are puffed up as though
I would not come to you; [4:19]but I will come to you shortly, if the
Lord will, and will know not the word of those who are puffed up but
the power; [4:20]for the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.
[4:21]What do you wish? shall I come to you with a rod, or in love and
a spirit of meekness?




