CHAPTER III. MARRIAGE, CELIBACY, ETC., AND THINGS OFFERED TO IDOLS.


1 [7:1]CONCERNING what you wrote to me, it is good for a man not to
touch a woman; [7:2]but on account of fornications, let each man have
his wife, and each woman have her husband. [7:3]Let the husband render
to the wife her due, and in like manner also the wife the husband.
[7:4]The wife has not the right to her body, but the husband; and in
like manner the husband has not the right to his body, but the wife.
[7:5]Withhold not yourselves from one another, except by agreement for
a time that you may be at leisure for prayer, and come together again,
that Satan may not tempt you by your incontinence. [7:6]But this I say
by suggestion, not by command. [7:7]For I wish that all men were even
as I am; but each one has his gift from God, and one is of one kind and
another of another.

2 [7:8]And I say to the unmarried and to the widows, that it is good
for them to continue as I am; [7:9]but if they have not self-control,
let them marry; it is better to marry than to be incontinent. [7:10]But
the married I charge, not I, but the Lord, Let not a wife separate from
her husband, [7:11]and also if she is separated let her remain
unmarried or be reconciled to the husband, and let not a husband leave
his wife.

3 [7:12]But to the rest I speak, not the Lord, If any brother has an
unbelieving wife, and she is pleased to live with him, let him not
leave her; [7:13]and if any wife has an unbelieving husband and he is
pleased to live with her, let her not leave the husband. [7:14]For the
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the brother; else were your children
impure, but now are they holy.  [7:15]But if the unbelieving companion
departs, let him depart; the brother or the sister is not bound in such
cases; but God has called us to peace. [7:16]For how do you know, wife,
that you will not save your husband? or how do you know, husband, that
you will not save your wife?

4 [7:17]Unless as the Lord has imparted to each one, as God has called
each one, so let him walk; and so I appoint in all the churches.
[7:18]Is any one called being circumcised, let him not be
uncircumcised; is any one called in uncircumcision, let him not be
circumcised. [7:19]Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but keeping God's commandments.  [7:20]Let each one remain in
the calling in which he was called; [7:21]were you called being a
servant, care not for it; but if you can be free, use it rather.
[7:22]For the servant called in the Lord is the Lord's freeman; in like
manner the called freeman is Christ's servant. [7:23]You are bought
with a price; be not servants of men. [7:24]Let each one continue,
brothers, in the calling in which he was called under God.

5 [7:25]And concerning the virgins I have no ordinance of the Lord, but
I give an opinion as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful. [7:26]I think then that this is good on account of the
present necessity, because it is good for man to be so. [7:27]Are you
bound to a wife, seek not a release; are you released from a wife, seek
not a wife. [7:28]But if you marry, you do not sin and if the virgin
marries she does not sin. But such will have affliction in the flesh;
but I spare you.  [7:29]But this I say, brothers, the time is short, so
that in future those who have wives should be as those not having them,
[7:30]and those who weep as those not weeping, and those who rejoice as
those not rejoicing, and those who buy as not possessing, [7:31]and
those who use the world as those not abusing it; for the fashion of
this world passes away. [7:32] But I wish you to be without cares. The
unmarried man cares for the things of the Lord, how he shall please the
Lord; [7:33]but he that is married cares for the things of the world,
how he shall please the wife. [7:34]And the wife and the virgin are
different; the unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that
she may be holy in body and spirit; but she that is married cares for
the things of the world, how she shall please the husband.  [7:35]But I
say this for your own profit; not to impose a snare on you, but for
[your] honor, and [your] attending on the Lord without distraction.

6 [7:36]But if any one thinks that he behaves improperly to his virgin,
if she is past her prime, and it must be so, let him do what he wishes;
he does not sin; let them marry. [7:37]But he that stands firm in mind,
not having a necessity, but has power over his will, and has determined
in his mind to keep his virgin, does well. [7:38]He that gives in
marriage therefore does well, and he that gives not in marriage does
better.

7 [7:39]A woman is bound as long as her husband lives; but if her
husband is dead then she is free to be married to whom she will; only
in the Lord. [7:40] But she is happier if she continues thus, in my
opinion, and I think also I have the Spirit of God.

8 [8:1]And concerning things offered to idols we all have knowledge.
Knowledge puffs up, but love edifies. [8:2]And if any one thinks he
knows any thing, he yet knows nothing as he ought to know; [8:3]but if
any one loves God, this [man] is known by him. [8:4]Concerning eating
things offered to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world,
and that there is no other God but one. [8:5]For even if there are
those called Gods, whether in heaven or on earth, as there are many
gods and many lords, [8:6]yet to us there is one God the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through
whom are all things and we through him. [8:7]But all have not this
knowledge; and some with the conscience [unenlightened] even till now
eat an idol's [sacrifice] as an idol's sacrifice, and their conscience
being weak is defiled. [8:8]But food does not commend us to God; for
neither if we eat not are we worse, nor if we eat are we better.
[8:9]But beware lest your liberty should become an offense to the weak.
[8:10]For if any one sees you who have knowledge reclining in an idol's
temple, will not the conscience of him that is weak be emboldened to
eat things offered to idols?  [8:11]And will not the weak brother for
whom Christ died perish by your knowledge? [8:12]But when you thus sin
against the brothers, and wound their weak conscience, you sin against
Christ. [8:13] Wherefore, if food offends my brother, I will eat no
meat forever, that I may not offend my brother.




