CHAPTER V. PUBLIC WORSHIP, THE LORD'S SUPPER.


1 [11:2]I COMMEND you, brothers, that you have remembered all my
[instructions], and that you retain the traditions as I delivered them
to you. [11:3]But I wish you to know that the head of every man is
Christ, and the head of the woman, the man, and the head of Christ,
God. [11:4]Every man praying or prophesying with his head covered
disgraces his head. [11:5]But every woman praying or prophesying with
her head uncovered disgraces her head; for it is one and the same as if
she was shaved. [11:6]For if a woman is not veiled then let her hair be
cut off; but if it is disgraceful for a woman to have her hair cut off,
or to be shaved, let her wear a veil.

2 [11:7]For a man ought not to cover his head, being an image and glory
of God; but the woman is a glory of man. [11:8]For man is not of woman,
but woman of man; [11:9]for man also was not created because of the
woman, but woman because of the man.  [11:10]For this reason ought the
woman to have a power [veil] on her head because of the angels.
[11:11]But neither is woman without man, nor man without woman in the
Lord; [11:12]for as the woman is of the man, so also the man is through
the woman, but all things are from God. [11:13]Judge of yourselves; is
it becoming that a woman should pray to God unveiled? [11:14] Does not
nature herself teach you that if a man wears long hair it is a disgrace
to him? [11:15]but if a woman wears long hair it is her glory; for the
hair is given her for a covering. [11:16]But if any one is disposed to
be contentious, we have no such custom neither have the churches of God.

3 [11:17]But I tell you this, not to praise you, that you come together
not for the better but for the worse. [11:18]For first, when you come
together in an assembly, I hear that there are divisions among you, and
some part of it I believe. [11:19]For it is necessary that there should
be heresies among you, that the approved may be manifest among you.
[11:20]When you come together therefore, it is not to eat the Lord's
supper, [11:21]for each one in eating takes his supper before the rest,
and one is hungry and another drunk. [11:22] Have you not [food] to eat
and drink at your houses? or do you despise the church of God, and
shame those who have not [houses]? What shall I say to you? Shall I
commend you? In this I commend you not.

4 [11:23]For I received of the Lord, what I also delivered to you; that
on the night in which he was betrayed, the Lord Jesus took bread
[11:24]and giving thanks broke, and said, This is my body, which is for
you; this do in remembrance of me. [11:25]In like manner also the cup,
after supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant [sealed] with my
blood; this do, as often as you drink, in remembrance of me. [11:26]For
as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you declare the
Lord's death till he comes. [11:27]So that whoever eats this bread or
drinks this cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord. [11:28]But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of
the bread and drink of the cup; [11:29]for he eats and drinks judgment
to himself, who eats and drinks not discerning the body.

5 [11:30]For this reason many are weak and sick among you and some
sleep. [11:31]For if we judged ourselves we should not be judged;
[11:32]but being judged, we are chastened by the Lord, that we may not
be condemned with the world. [11:33]Therefore, my brothers, when you
come together to eat, wait one for another.  [11:34]If any one is
hungry let him eat at home, that you come not together for judgment.
The other things I will arrange when I come.




