CHAPTER VI. SPIRITUAL GIFTS.


1 [12:1]AND I wish you not to be ignorant, brothers, of the spiritual
gifts. [12:2]You know that when you were gentiles, you followed dumb
idols as you were led. [12:3]I assure you, therefore, that no one
speaking by the Spirit of God calls Jesus an accursed thing, and no one
can call Jesus Lord, except by the Holy Spirit.

2 [12:4]And there are diversities of gifts but the same Spirit;
[12:5]and there are diversities of services and the same Lord;
[12:6]and there are diversities of operations and the same God, who
performs all things in all. [12:7]But a manifestation of the Spirit is
given to each one for a useful purpose. [12:8]For to one is given by
the Spirit a word of wisdom, and to another a word of knowledge by the
same Spirit, [12:9]and to another faith by the same Spirit, and to
another gifts of performing cures by the same Spirit, [12:10]and to
another the performance of mighty works, and to another prophecy, and
to another discrimination of spirits, and to another different tongues,
and to another an interpretation of tongues; [12:11]but all these
[works] performs one and the same Spirit, distributing to each in
particular as it wills.

3 [12:12]For as the body is one and has many members, and all the
members of the body being many are one body, so also is Christ;
[12:13]for we have all been baptized with one Spirit in one body,
whether Jews or Greeks, whether servants or freemen, and have all been
made to drink one Spirit. [12:14]For the body also is not one member
but many. [12:15]If the foot says, Because I am not a hand, I am not of
the body, is it therefore not of the body?  [12:16]and if the ear says,
Because I am not an eye, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of
the body? [12:17]If the whole body was an eye, where would be the
hearing? If the whole was a hearing, where would be the smelling?
[12:18]But now God has placed the members each one of them in the body,
as he pleased.  [12:19]But if all were one member, where would be the
body?  [12:20]But now there are many members, but one body. [12:21]The
eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of you, or again, the head
to the feet, I have no need of you; [12:22]but much more those members
of the body which seem to be weak are necessary, [12:23]and those which
we esteem to be less honorable members of the body, on these we bestow
more abundant honor, and our uncomely members have more abundant
comeliness, [12:24]for our comely ones have no need. But God has
commingled the body, giving more abundant honor to that part which was
lacking, [12:25]that there should be no schism in the body, but that
the members should have the same care one for another. [12:26]And if
one member suffers, all the members suffer with it; and if one member
is glorified, all the members rejoice with it.

4 [12:27]And you are a body of Christ, and members in particular.
[12:28]And God has set some in the church, first apostles, secondly
prophets, thirdly teachers, then powers, then gifts of performing
cures, aids, governments, different tongues.  [12:29]Are all apostles?
are all prophets? are all teachers? are all powers? [12:30]have all
gifts of performing cures? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?
[12:31]But desire earnestly the best gifts: and I will still more fully
show you the way.

5 [13:1]If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels and have not
love, I am a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. [13:2]And if I have
prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and if I
have all faith so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am
nothing. [13:3]And if I deal out all my property to feed the poor, and
if I deliver my body to be burned, and have not love, I shall not be
profited.

6 [13:4]Love suffers long and is kind; love envies not; love is not
boastful, is not puffed up, [13:5]does not behave unbecomingly, seeks
not her own, is not easily provoked, devises not evil, [13:6]rejoices
not in wickedness, but rejoices in the truth; [13:7]bears all things,
believes all things, hopes for all things, and endures all things.

7 [13:8]Love never fails; but if there are prophecies, they shall pass
away; if tongues, they shall cease; if knowledge, it shall pass away.
[13:9]And we know in part and we prophesy in part; [13:10]when the
perfect has come, that which is in part shall pass away. [13:11]When I
was a child, I spoke as a child, I thought as a child, I reasoned as a
child; when I became a man I put away childish things. [13:12]For now
we see by a mirror darkly, but then we shall see face to face; now I
know in part, but then I shall know fully as I also am known.
[13:13]And now remain faith, hope, love, these three; but the greatest
of these is love.

8 [14:1]Cherish love, and be earnestly desirous of spiritual gifts, but
rather that you may prophesy. [14:2]For he that speaks with a tongue
speaks not to men but to God; for no one understands him, but in spirit
he speaks mysteries; [14:3]but he that prophesies speaks to men to
edification and exhortation and consolation. [14:4]He that speaks with
a tongue edifies himself; but he that prophesies edifies an assembly.
[14:5]I wish you all to speak with tongues, but rather that you should
prophesy; and he that prophesies is greater than he that speaks with
tongues, unless he interprets, that the assembly may receive
edification.

9 [14:6]But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking with tongues, what
shall I profit you, unless I speak to you by a revelation, or by a
knowledge, or by a prophecy, or by a doctrine? [14:7]So of irrational
objects making a sound, whether a flute or harp; if it makes no
distinction of sounds, how shall it be known what is played on the
flute or harp? [14:8]For also if the trumpet gives an uncertain sound,
who will prepare himself for the battle? [14:9]So also you by a tongue
if you utter a word not easily understood, how shall it be known what
is spoken? for you will speak to the air. [14:10]There are perhaps as
many kinds of voices in the world, and no one is without significance;
[14:11]if therefore I do not know the meaning of the voice, I shall be
to him that speaks a barbarian, and he that speaks will be a barbarian
to me. [14:12]So also you, since you are earnestly desirous of spirits
[spiritual gifts], seek to abound for the edification of the church.
[14:13]Let him therefore that speaks with a tongue pray that he may
interpret, [14:14]For if I pray with a tongue, my spirit prays, but my
understanding is unfruitful. [14:15]What then is [to be done]? I will
pray with the spirit, I will pray also with the understanding; I will
sing with the spirit, I will sing also with the understanding; [14:16]
since if you bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the
place of the unlearned say, Amen, to your thanksgiving, since he knows
not what you say? [14:17]For you indeed give thanks well; but the other
is not edified. [14:18]I thank God I speak with a tongue more than you
all; [14:19]but in an assembly I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that I may also teach others, than ten thousand words in
a tongue.

10 [14:20]Brothers, be not children in understanding, but in malice be
children, and in understanding be perfect men.  [14:21]For it is
written in the law, With other tongues, and with other lips will I
speak to this people, and so they shall not understand me, says the
Lord. [14:22]Tongues therefore are a sign, not for believers but for
unbelievers, but prophecy is not for unbelievers but for believers.
[14:23]If, therefore, the whole church comes together, and all speak
with tongues, and there come in the unlearned and unbelieving, will
they not say that you are mad? [14:24]But if all prophesy, and there
comes in an unbeliever or an unlearned man, he is convinced by all, he
is examined by all, [14:25]and the secrets of his heart are made
manifest, and so falling down on his face he worships God, declaring
that God is really among you.

11 [14:26]What then is [to be done] brothers? When you come together,
each one of you has a psalm, has a doctrine, has a revelation, has an
interpretation; let all things be done for edification. [14:27]If any
one speaks with a tongue, let it be by two or at most by three, and by
turns, and let one interpret; [14:28] and if there is no interpreter,
let him be silent in the assembly, and let him speak to himself and to
God. [14:29]Let two or three prophets speak, and let the rest judge;
[14:30]but if any thing is revealed to another sitting by, let the
first be silent. [14:31]For you can all prophesy one by one, that all
may learn, and all be comforted. [14:32]And the spirits of prophets are
subject to the prophets; [14:33]for God is not [the friend] of disorder
but of peace.

12 [14:34]As in all the churches of the saints, let your women keep
silence in the assemblies; for it is not permitted to them to speak,
but to be in subjection, as the law also says.  [14:35]But if they wish
to learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home; for it is a
shame for a woman to speak in an assembly. [14:36]Did the word of God
go out from you, or did it come to you alone?

13 [14:37]If any one thinks he is a prophet, or a spiritual man, let
him acknowledge the [things] which I write to you, that they are the
Lord's; [14:38] but if any one is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
[14:39]Therefore, brothers, desire earnestly to prophesy, and forbid
not to speak with tongues; [14:40]but let all things be done becomingly
and in order.




