CHAPTER VII. THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD.


1 [15:1]I DECLARE to you, brothers, the gospel which I preached to you,
which you also received, in which also you stand, [15:2]by which also
you are saved, if you adhere to the word we preached to you, unless
indeed you believed in vain. [15:3]For I delivered to you at first,
what I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures, [15:4]and that he was buried, and that he rose on the third
day according to the Scriptures, [15:5]and that he appeared to Cephas,
then to the twelve. [15:6]Afterwards he appeared to more than five
hundred brothers at once, of whom the most continue even to the present
time, but some have fallen asleep. [15:7]Then he appeared to James,
then to all the apostles, [15:8]and last of all he appeared to me also,
as one born out of due time. [15:9]For I am the least of the apostles,
and am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the
church of God; [15:10] but by the grace of God I am what I am, and his
grace to me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they
all, but not I but the grace of God with me. [15:11]Whether therefore
it is I or they, so we preach, and so you believed.

2 [15:12]But if Christ is preached that he was raised from the dead,
how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
[15:13]But if there is not a resurrection of the dead, Christ has not
been raised; [15:14]and if Christ has not been raised, then both our
preaching is vain, and your faith also vain; [15:15]and we are found
also false witnesses of God, because we testified in regard to God that
he raised up Christ, whom he raised not up if indeed the dead are not
raised.  [15:16]For if the dead are not raised, Christ was not raised;
[15:17]and if Christ was not raised, your faith is vain, you are yet in
your sins, [15:18]and those then who have fallen asleep in Christ have
perished. [15:19]If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men most miserable.

3 [15:20]But now Christ has been raised from the dead, a first fruit of
those that have slept. [15:21]For since by a man came death, by a man
also came the resurrection of the dead.  [15:22]For as in Adam all die,
so in Christ also shall all be made alive. [15:23]But each one in his
own order; Christ a first fruit, then those who are Christ's at his
coming; [15:24]then is the end, when he delivers up the kingdom to the
God and Father, when he will destroy every principality and every
authority and power. [15:25]For he must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet. [15:26]The last enemy, death, shall be
destroyed, [15:27]for he put all things under his feet. But when he
says that all things are put under him, it is clear that he is excepted
who puts all things under him; [15:28]and when all things have been put
under him, then will the Son also himself be subject to him that put
all things under him, that God may be all in all.

4 [15:29]Else what will they do who are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? and why are they baptized for them?  [15:30]Why
also do we encounter danger every hour? [15:31]By the joy on account of
you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. [15:32]If after
the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, of what
advantage is it to me? If the dead rise not, let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die. [15:33]Be not deceived; evil companionships corrupt
good morals.  [15:34]Awake to righteousness and sin not; for some have
not a knowledge of God. I speak to your shame.

5 [15:35]But some one will say, How are the dead raised up? and with
what body do they come? [15:36]Foolish man, what you sow is not made
alive unless it dies; [15:37]and what you sow, you sow not the body
which shall be, but the naked grain, it may be of wheat, or some of the
other grains; [15:38]but God gives it a body as he pleases, and to each
of the grains its own body.  [15:39] All flesh is not the same flesh;
but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another
flesh of birds, and another of fishes. [15:40]And there are heavenly
bodies and earthly bodies; but the glory of the heavenly is one, and of
the earthly another. [15:41]There is one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for star differs
from star in glory. [15:42]So also is the resurrection of the dead. It
is sown in destruction, it is raised in indestructibleness; [15:43]it
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it
is raised in power; [15:44]it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body.  If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual
body.  [15:45]And thus it is written; The first man Adam became a
living soul; the last Adam is a life-giving spirit. [15:46] But the
spiritual was not first, but the natural; then the spiritual.  [15:47]
The first man was from the earth, earthly, the second man is from
heaven. [15:48]Like the earthly, such also are the earthly; and like
the heavenly, such also are the heavenly; [15:49]and as we have borne
the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.

6 [15:50]But I say this, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God, nor shall destruction inherit indestructibleness.
[15:51] Behold, I tell you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed, [15:52]in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead be
raised, indestructible, and we shall be changed. [15:53]For this
destructible must put on indestructibleness, and this mortal must put
on immortality.  [15:54]And when this destructible has put on
indestructibleness, and this mortal has put on immortality, then shall
the word be accomplished that is written; Death was swallowed up in
victory.  [15:55]Where, death, is your sting? where, death, is your
victory? [15:56]And the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is
the law; [15:57]but thanks be to God who gives us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ. [15:58] Therefore, my beloved brothers, be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.




