CHAPTER VIII. CHARITABLE COLLECTIONS, TIMOTHY, APOLLOS, FAMILY OF STEPHANAS, SALUTATIONS.


1 [16:1]CONCERNING the collection for the saints, as I directed the
churches of Galatia, so also do you. [16:2]On the first day of the week
let each one of you lay aside by himself in store as God has prospered
him, that there may be no collections made when I come. [16:3]And when
I come, whom you shall approve, these will I send with letters to carry
your charity to Jerusalem; [16:4]and if it seems best that I should go,
they shall go with me.  [16:5]And I will come to you when I pass
through Macedonia; for I will pass through Macedonia [16:6]and perhaps
remain and spend the winter, that you may send me forward wherever I
go. [16:7]For I do not wish now to see you by the way; for I hope to
continue some time with you, if the Lord permits. [16:8]But I will
remain at Ephesus till Pentecost, [16:9]for a great and effectual door
is opened to me, and there are many adversaries.

2 [16:10]If Timothy comes, see that he is with you without fear, for he
performs the work of the Lord, as I also do; [16:11]let no one
therefore despise him. But send him forward in peace, that he may come
to me; for I look for him with the brothers.

3 [16:12]But concerning Apollos the brother, I have exhorted him much
to come to you with the brothers; but he was entirely indisposed to
come now, but he will come when he has a convenient time.

4 [16:13]Be watchful, stand firm in the faith, be manly, be strong,
[16:14]let all your [works] be in love.

5 [16:15]And I exhort you, brothers, know the family of Stephanas, for
it is a first fruit of Achaia, and they devoted themselves to serving
the saints; [16:16]that you also be in subjection to such, and to every
one that works and labors with us. [16:17]I am glad of the coming of
Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaiacus, for they supplied your lack,
[16:18]and refreshed my spirit and yours. Know therefore such.

6 [16:19]The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute
you much in the Lord, with the assembly [church] at their house.
[16:20]All the brothers salute you. Salute one another with a holy kiss.

7 [16:21]The salutation with my hand, Paul's. [16:22]If any one is not
a friend to the Lord, let him be accursed. The Lord comes.  [16:23]The
grace of the Lord Jesus be with you. [16:24]My love be with you all in
Christ Jesus.





