CHAPTER II. A CONTRIBUTION SOLICITED FOR THE SAINTS AT JERUSALEM.


1 [8:1]AND I make known to you, brothers, the grace of God given to the
churches of Macedonia, [8:2]that in much trying affliction the
abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of
their liberality. [8:3]For according to their ability, I testify, and
beyond their ability, of their own accord, [8:4]with much entreaty they
desired of us the favor of a participation in the service to the
saints; [8:5]and not as we hoped, but they first gave themselves to the
Lord and to us by the will of God, [8:6]so that we requested Titus, as
he before began, that he would complete also this charity with you.
[8:7]But as you abound in every thing, in faith, and speech, and
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love for us, [we desire]
that you may abound in this grace also.

2 [8:8]I do not speak by command, but on account of the diligence of
others, and to prove the genuineness of your love; [8:9]for you know
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he became poor,
though rich, that you by his poverty might be rich. [8:10]And in this
case I give an opinion; for this is expedient for you, who began before
to act in this matter and to act willingly a year ago. [8:11]And now,
therefore, perform the doing also, that as there was a readiness to
will, so also there may be a performance from what you have. [8:12]For
if there is a willing mind, a man is acceptable according to what he
has, and not according to what he has not. [8:13]Not that others may be
relieved and you burdened, [8:14]but that there may be an equality;
that at the present time your abundance may supply their deficiency,
and that their abundance may supply your deficiency, that there may be
an equality, [8:15]as it is written; He that [gathered] much had
nothing over, and he that [gathered] little had no deficiency.

3 [8:16]But thanks be to God, who put this care for you into the heart
of Titus, [8:17]for he received the exhortation, and being extremely
diligent went to you of his own accord. [8:18]And we sent with him the
brother, whose praise in the gospel is in all the churches, [8:19]and
not only so, but he has also been chosen by the churches as our
travelling companion in this charity ministered by us for the glory of
the same Lord and our promptitude, [8:20] guarding against this, that
no one may blame us in this abundance administered by us; [8:21]for we
provide things honorable not only before the Lord, but also before men.
[8:22]And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have often proved
in many services to be diligent, and who is now much more diligent from
the great confidence in you. [8:23]If [any one inquires] respecting
Titus, he is my companion and co-laborer for you; if our brothers, they
are apostles of churches and the glory of Christ. [8:24]Show them
therefore the proof of your love, and of our boasting of you before the
churches.

4 [9:1]For concerning the service for the saints it is superfluous for
me to write to you; [9:2]for I know your readiness, of which I boasted
in your behalf to the Macedonians that Achaia was ready a year ago, and
your zeal has excited many.  [9:3]But I sent the brothers, that our
boasting of you may not be in vain in this respect, as I said you were
prepared, [9:4]lest if the Macedonians should come with me and find you
unprepared, we, not to say you, should be ashamed of this confidence.
[9:5]I thought it necessary, therefore, to exhort the brothers to go to
you before, and to make ready your free gift before announced, that it
may be ready as a free gift and not as an exaction.

5 [9:6]And [consider] this, He that sows sparingly shall reap also
sparingly, and he that sows liberally shall reap also liberally.
[9:7]Let each one contribute as he chooses in his heart, not with
regret or from necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. [9:8]And God
is able to make every favor abound to you, that having always every
sufficiency in every thing you may abound in every good work; [9:9]as
it is written, He scattered abroad, he gave to the poor, his
righteousness continues forever. [9:10]And may he that supplies seed to
the sower and bread for eating multiply your grain, and increase the
products of your righteousness; [9:11]that you may be enriched in every
thing for all liberality, which produces through us thanksgiving to
God. [9:12]For the performance of this service not only supplies the
need of the saints, but also abounds with the thanksgivings of many to
God; [9:13][they] glorifying God on account of the proof of this
ministry for your professed subjection to the gospel of Christ and the
liberality of the contribution to them and to all, [9:14]and by their
prayer for you, greatly longing for you on account of the abounding
grace of God upon you. [9:15]Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift.




