CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST REPLYING TO THE PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES, ETC.


1 [16:1]AND the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to Jesus to try him
desired him to show them a sign from heaven. [16:2]But he answered and
said to them, When it is evening you say, It will be fair weather for
the sky is red; [16:3]and in the morning, It will rain to-day for the
sky is red and lowering. You know how to distinguish the face of the
sky, but you cannot distinguish the signs of the times. [16:4]An evil
and adulterous generation seeks a sign; and no sign shall be given it
except the sign of Jonah.  And he left them and departed.

2 [16:5]And when his disciples came to the other side they forgot to
take bread. [16:6]And Jesus said to them, Observe and beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees. [16:7]But they reasoned within
themselves, saying, It is because we have not taken bread. [16:8]But
Jesus knowing it, said, Why do you reason within yourselves, men of
little faith, because you have not taken bread? [16:9]Do you not yet
understand nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how
many travelling-baskets you took up? [16:10]nor the seven loaves of the
four thousand, and how many store-baskets you took up? [16:11]Why do
you not understand that I spoke to you not of bread, to beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees? [16:12]Then they understood that
he did not tell them to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the
teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

3 [16:13]And Jesus coming into the parts of Cesarea Philippi, asked his
disciples, saying, Who do men say that the Son of man is? [16:14]And
they said, Some, John the Baptist; others, Elijah; and others,
Jeremiah, or one of the prophets. [16:15]And he said to them, Who say
you that I am? [16:16]And Simon Peter answered and said, You are the
Christ, the Son of the living God. [16:17] And Jesus answered and said
to him, Blessed are you, Simon, son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has
not revealed this to you, but my Father in heaven. [16:18] And I tell
you that you are Peter [a rock], and upon this rock will I build my
assembly, and the gates of hades shall not prevail against it.
[16:19]And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and
whatever you bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever
you unbind on the earth shall be unbound in heaven. [16:20]Then he
charged his disciples to tell no man that he was the Christ.

4 [16:21]From that time Jesus began to show his disciples that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders, and chief
priests, and scribes, and be killed, and raised on the third day.
[16:22]And Peter taking hold of him said, rebuking him, Far be it from
you, Lord! This shall not be to you.  [16:23]But he turned and said to
Peter, Get behind me, Satan! You are an offense to me! For you regard
not the things of God, but those of men.

5 [16:24]Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any one will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
[16:25]For whoever wishes to save his life shall lose it, and whoever
loses his life for my sake, shall find it. [16:26]For what is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his life? Or what
will a man give as an exchange for his life?  [16:27]For the Son of man
is about to come in the glory of his Father, with his angels, and then
shall he render to every one according to his doing. [16:28]I tell you
truly, that some of those standing here shall not taste death till they
see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.




