CHAPTER III. PAUL'S REPLY TO HIS DETRACTORS.


1 [10:1]I PAUL also exhort you by the meekness and gentleness of
Christ, who in appearance am humble among you, but being absent am bold
towards you; [10:2]and I desire that I may not be bold when present,
with that confidence which I design to use against some who speak of us
as if we walked according to the flesh.  [10:3]For though we walk in
the flesh we do not war according to the flesh, [10:4]for the arms of
our warfare are not of flesh, but mighty with God to the pulling down
of strongholds, [10:5]destroying [false] reasonings and every height
which is exalted against the knowledge of God, and subjecting every
thought to the obedience of Christ, [10:6]and being ready to punish
every disobedience, when your obedience is completed.

2 [10:7]You see things according to appearances. If any one trusts in
himself that he is Christ's, let him consider again with himself that
as he is Christ's so also are we. [10:8]For if I should even boast some
of our authority which the Lord gave for your edification, and not for
your destruction, I should not be ashamed. [10:9][But I forbear,] that
I may not seem as though I would terrify you by epistles. [10:10]For
the epistles, say they, are weighty and powerful, but the bodily
presence is weak and speech contemptible. [10:11]Let such a one think,
that such as we are in word by epistles when absent, such also will we
be in work when present. [10:12]For we dare not judge or compare
ourselves with some who commend themselves; but they, measuring
themselves with themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves,
are not wise. [10:13]But we will not boast of things not measured, but
according to the measure of the rule which God has given us, to come
even to you. [10:14]For we do not stretch ourselves out too far, as if
we had not come to you, for we came even to you with the gospel of
Christ; [10:15]not boasting of things unmeasured in the labors of
others, but having a hope, your faith being increased, that we shall be
magnified among you according to our rule abundantly, [10:16]to preach
the gospel in the parts beyond you, not to boast of things prepared by
another's rule.  [10:17]But let him that glories glory in the Lord;
[10:18]for not he that commends himself is approved, but he whom the
Lord commends.

3 [11:1]I wish you would bear a little with my folly; and indeed do
bear with me. [11:2]For I am zealous for you with a godly zeal, for I
joined you, a chaste virgin, to one husband, to present to Christ;
[11:3]but I fear lest as the serpent deceived Eve with his craftiness,
so also your minds may be corrupted from the simplicity which is in
Christ. [11:4]For if he that comes preaches another Jesus whom we did
not preach, or you receive another spirit which you did not receive, or
another gospel which you did not receive, you might well bear it;
[11:5]for I judge that I am not behind the chief of the apostles.
[11:6]And even if I am rude in speech, I certainly am not in knowledge,
but we have been made fully manifest to you in all things. [11:7] Have
I done wrong to humble myself that you might be exalted, that I
preached the gospel of God to you gratuitously? [11:8]I robbed other
churches taking wages to serve you; [11:9]and when I was with you and
was in want, I was burdensome to no one; for the brothers who came from
Macedonia supplied beforehand my need; and in every thing I kept myself
without being burdensome to you, and will keep myself so.

4 [11:10]As the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting in respect to
myself shall not be silenced in the regions of Achaia.  [11:11]Why?
Because I love you not? God knows. [11:12]But what I do I also will do,
that I may take away an occasion from those who wish an occasion, that
wherein they boast they may be found even as we are. [11:13]For such
false apostles, deceitful laborers, transform themselves into apostles
of Christ.  [11:14]And no wonder; for Satan himself transforms himself
into an angel of light. [11:15]It is no great thing, therefore, if his
ministers transform themselves as ministers of righteousness, whose end
will be according to their works.

5 [11:16]Again, I say let no one think me to be foolish; but if
otherwise, even as a foolish man bear with me that I may boast a
little. [11:17]What I say, I do not say according to the Lord, but as
it were in foolishness, in this confidence of boasting.  [11:18]Since
many boast of the flesh, I also will boast.  [11:19]You endure fools
patiently being wise; [11:20]for you endure it if any one reduces you
to servitude, if any one devours you, if any one takes from you, if any
one exalts himself against you, if any one beats you in the face.

6 [11:21]I speak of reproach as if we were weak; wherein any one is
bold, I speak foolishly, I am bold also. [11:22]Are they Hebrews? so am
I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the posterity of Abraham? so
am I. [11:23]Are they ministers of Christ? I speak foolishly, I am
more; in labors most abundant, in stripes above measure, in
imprisonments most abundant, in deaths often; [11:24]five times I
received of the Jews forty [stripes] lacking one, [11:25] thrice was I
beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice have I been shipwrecked, a
night and a day have I spent in the deep; [11:26]often on journeys, in
dangers from rivers, in dangers from robbers, in dangers from [my own]
race, in dangers from gentiles, in dangers in the city, in dangers in
the wilderness, in dangers on the sea, in dangers among false brothers,
[11:27]in labor and weariness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.  [11:28]Besides
things without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the
churches. [11:29]Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I
am not displeased? [11:30]If it is necessary to boast, I will boast of
my infirmities. [11:31]The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is blessed forever, knows that I lie not. [11:32]In Damascus, the
ethnarch, when Aretas was king, guarded the city of the Damascenes,
desiring to take me, [11:33]and I was let down in a rope-basket, by a
window in the wall, and escaped from his hands.

7 [12:1]It is not expedient therefore for me to boast [of these
things]; for I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
[12:2]I know a man, in Christ above fourteen years, whether in the body
I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows,--such a one
caught up to the third heaven. [12:3]I know even such a man,--whether
in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows,-- [12:4]that he
was caught up to paradise, and heard unutterable words, which it is not
lawful for man to speak.  [12:5]Of such a one will I boast, but of
myself I will not boast except of my infirmities. [12:6]For if I shall
wish to boast I shall not be foolish, for I will tell the truth. But I
forbear, lest any one should think of me beyond what he sees or hears
of me.

8 [12:7]And that I might not be elated with my extraordinary
revelations, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan
to beat me, that I should not be too much exalted.  [12:8]For this I
besought the Lord thrice that it might leave me.  [12:9]And he said to
me, My grace is sufficient for you; for power is perfected in weakness.
[12:10]Most gladly, therefore, will I glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me. Wherefore I am well pleased with
infirmities, with injuries, with necessities, with persecutions, with
distresses for Christ; for when I am weak, then am I strong.

9 [12:11]I have become foolish; you compelled me. For I ought to have
been commended by you; for in nothing am I behind the chief of the
apostles, though I also am nothing. [12:12]The signs of an apostle were
performed among you with all patience, in miracles, and prodigies, and
mighty works. [12:13]For what is there in which you were inferior to
the rest of the churches, except that I was not burdensome to you?
Forgive me this wrong.

10 [12:14]Behold, I am ready to come to you a third time, and I will
not be burdensome to you; for I seek not yours, but you. For the
children ought not to lay up treasure for the parents, but the parents
for the children. [12:15]And I most gladly will spend and will be spent
for your souls, even if the more abundantly I love you the less I am
loved. [12:16]Be it so, I was not burdensome to you; but being crafty I
caught you with deceit.  [12:17]Did I make any thing out of you by any
of those I sent to you? [12:18]I requested Titus, and sent the brother
with him; did Titus make any thing out of you? Did we not walk in the
same spirit, in the same steps?




