CHAPTER IV. PROPOSED VISIT, ETC.


1 [12:19]Do you again think that we are defending ourselves? We speak
in Christ before God; all these things, beloved, are for your
edification. [12:20]For I fear lest when I come I shall not find you
such as I wish, and that I shall be found such as you wish not; lest
there shall be strife, envy, anger, contentions, evil speakings,
whisperings, pride, dissensions; [12:21]lest when I come again my God
shall humble me before you, and I shall mourn for many who have sinned,
and not changed their minds, in respect to impurity and fornication and
lewdness which they have committed.

2 [13:1]This third time I am coming to you; by the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established. [13:2]I have said
before, and I now foretell as if present a second time, although
absent, to those who have already sinned and to all the rest, that if I
come again I will not spare; [13:3]since you seek a proof in me of
Christ speaking, who is not weak to you but powerful in you; [13:4]for
though he was crucified in weakness, yet he lives by the power of God;
and we also are weak in him, but live with him by the power of God in
you.

3 [13:5]Try yourselves, whether you are in the faith; prove yourselves;
or know you not yourselves that Christ is in you unless you are
reprobates? [13:6]But I hope you will know that we are not reprobates.
[13:7]We wish to God that you may do no evil, not that we may appear
approved, but that you may do good though we should be as reprobates.
[13:8]For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
[13:9]For we rejoice when we are weak and you are strong; and we desire
this, your perfection.  [13:10]For this reason, being absent, I write
these things, that I may not use sharpness when present, with the power
which the Lord has given me for building up, and not for pulling down.

4 [13:11]Finally, brothers, rejoice, be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of the same mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be
with you. [13:12]Salute one another with a holy kiss. [13:13]All the
saints salute you. [13:14]The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.





