THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. CHAPTER I. HIMSELF, JESUS CHRIST, AND THE GOSPEL.


CORINTH, A.D., 58. (ACTS, 18:1)

1 [1:1]PAUL, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set
apart to the gospel of God,-- [1:2]which he promised by his prophets in
the Holy Scriptures,-- [1:3]concerning his Son born of the posterity of
David as to the flesh, [1:4]declared to be the Son of God in power as
to the Spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead,--Jesus
Christ our Lord,-- [1:5]through whom we have received grace and an
apostleship for the obedience of the faith in all nations in behalf of
his name, [1:6]among whom are you also the called of Jesus Christ,--
[1:7]to all who are at Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints.
Grace be to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 [1:8]First, indeed, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all,
that your faith is proclaimed in all the world. [1:9]For God is my
witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, how
incessantly I make mention of you, always in my prayers [1:10]asking if
by any means I may now at some time have a prosperous journey by the
will of God to come to you. [1:11]For I greatly desire to see you, that
I may impart to you some spiritual gift, that you may be strengthened,
[1:12]that is, that I may be comforted in you by the mutual faith both
of you and me.

3 [1:13]But I wish you not to be ignorant, brothers, that I often
purposed to come to you, and was hindered hitherto, that I might have
some fruit also among you, as among the other gentiles.  [1:14]I am a
debtor both to the Greeks and the Barbarians, both to the wise and the
ignorant; [1:15]so that as far as depends upon me I am ready also to
preach the gospel to those at Rome.  [1:16] For I am not ashamed of the
gospel; for it is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes, the Jew first and also the Greek. [1:17]For God's
righteousness is revealed in it by faith in the faith [the gospel]; as
it is written; The righteous shall live by faith.




