CHAPTER III. GOD'S RIGHTEOUSNESS BY FAITH SAVES BOTH JEWS AND GENTILES.


1 [3:21]BUT now God's righteousness has been made manifest without the
law, being testified to by the law and the prophets, [3:22]but God's
righteousness is through the faith of Jesus Christ, in all and upon all
that believe. For there is no difference; [3:23]for all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, [3:24]being justified freely by his
grace through the redemption in Christ Jesus, [3:25]whom God set forth
[to be] a propitiator through faith in his blood, to show his
righteousness because of the passing by of the errors committed
previously in the forbearance of God, [3:26]to show his righteousness
at the present time, that he may be righteous and justify him that is
of faith.

2 [3:27]Where then is the boasting [of the Jew]? It is excluded.  By
what law? Of works? No; but by the law of faith. [3:28]We conclude then
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. [3:29]Is
God [a God] of the Jews alone? and not also of the gentiles? Yes, also
of the gentiles, [3:30] since there is one God who will justify the
circumcision by faith and the uncircumcision through the [same] faith.
[3:31]Do we then abrogate the law by the faith? By no means; but we
establish the law.

3 [4:1]What shall we say then that Abraham our father found according
to the flesh? [4:2]For if Abraham was justified by works he has
[occasion for] boasting, but not before God.  [4:3]For what says the
Scripture? And Abraham believed God and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. [4:4]But to one that works the reward is not accounted
by grace but by debt. [4:5]But to one that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the wicked, his faith is [accounted] for
righteousness. [4:6]As David describes the blessedness of the man to
whom the Lord accounts righteousness without works, [4:7]Blessed are
they whose transgressions are forgiven and whose sins are covered;
[4:8]blessed is the man to whom the Lord does not account sin.

4 [4:9]Is this blessedness then on the circumcision? or also on the
uncircumcision? [Also on the uncircumcision.] For we say that faith was
accounted to Abraham for righteousness. [4:10]How then was it
accounted? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision.  [4:11]And he received the symbol
of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which was in
uncircumcision, so that he became the father of all that believe in
uncircumcision, that righteousness may also be accounted to them,
[4:12]and a father of circumcision not to those of the circumcision
only, but to those also who walk in the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham which was in uncircumcision.

5 [4:13]For the promise to Abraham and his posterity that he should
inherit the world was not through the law but through the righteousness
of faith. [4:14]For if the subjects of the law are heirs, the faith is
done away and the promise abrogated.  [4:15]For the law produces wrath;
for where there is no law there is no transgression. [4:16]Therefore it
is by faith that it may be by grace, that the promise may be sure to
all the posterity, not to that of the law only but to that of the faith
of Abraham, who is a father of us all, [4:17]as it is written, I have
made you a father of many nations before God in whom he believed, who
makes the dead alive and calls things which do not exist as existing.--
[4:18]who against hope believed in hope that he should become a father
of many nations according to the saying shall your posterity be. [4:19]
And being not weak in faith, he did not regard himself as dead, being
now about a hundred years old, nor Sarah's incapacity for
child-bearing, [4:20]and he did not doubt the promise of God by
unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, [4:21]being
fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able to perform.
[4:22]Wherefore also it was accounted to him for righteousness. [4:23]
But it was not written for his sake alone, that it was accounted to
him, [4:24] but also for our sakes, to whom it is about to be accounted
if we believe on him that raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
[4:25]who was delivered up for our sins and raised for our
justification.

6 [5:1]Having been justified therefore by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, [5:2]through whom also we have been
introduced into this grace in which we stand, and rejoice in the hope
of the glory of God. [5:3]And not only [this], but we rejoice also in
afflictions, knowing that affliction works out patience, [5:4]and
patience, experience, and experience, hope; [5:5] and the hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts
through the Holy Spirit given us. [5:6]For when we were yet weak, in
due time Christ died for the wicked; [5:7]for scarcely for a righteous
man will one die, but for a good man some one perhaps would even dare
to die; [5:8]but God commends his love to us, that while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us; [5:9]much more then being now justified by
his blood, we shall be saved through him from wrath.  [5:10]For if when
enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much
more having become reconciled we shall be saved in his life. [5:11]And
not only so, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we received the present reconciliation.

7 [5:12]Therefore, as through one man sin entered into the world and
death through sin, and so came upon all men because all sinned,--
[5:13]for till the law there was sin in the world, but sin is not
accounted where there is no law [5:14]but death reigned from Adam till
Moses even over those that sinned not after the similitude Adam's
transgression, who is a type of him that was to come; [5:15]but not as
the fall so also is the gift; for if by the fall of one the many died,
much more the grace of God and the gift by grace which is of the one
man Jesus Christ, abounded to the many; [5:16]and not as through one
that sinned is the gift; for the judgment was by one to condemnation,
but the gift was from many sins to a righteous ordinance; [5:17]for if
by one fall death reigned through the one, much more those who receive
the abundance of the grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign
in life through the one, Jesus Christ;-- [5:18]therefore, as through
the fall of one [judgment came] on all men to condemnation, so also
through the righteous ordinance of one [the gift comes] on all men to
justification of life; [5:19]for as through the disobedience of the one
man the many were constituted sinners, so also through the obedience of
the one shall the many be constituted righteous. [5:20]For the law
supervened that the fall might abound; but where the sin abounded the
grace was superabundant, [5:21]that as sin reigned in death, so the
grace shall reign through righteousness in life eternal through Jesus
Christ our Lord.




