CHAPTER IV. SIN IS ON NO ACCOUNT TO BE ALLOWED.


1 [6:1]WHAT shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that the grace
may abound? [6:2]By no means. How shall we who died to sin any longer
live in it? [6:3]Do you not know that as many of us as were baptized in
Christ were baptized in his death? [6:4]We have been buried therefore
with him through baptism in death, that as Christ was raised from the
dead through the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness
of life. [6:5]For if we have been planted together in the likeness of
his death, we shall much more be of his resurrection; [6:6]knowing this
that our old man was crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that we should no longer serve sin; [6:7] for he that died
was justified from sin. [6:8]And if we died with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with him; [6:9]knowing that Christ being raised
from the dead dies no more; death has no longer a lordship over him.
[6:10]For [the death] which he died, he died to sin once; but [the
life] which he lives, he lives to God. [6:11]So also account yourselves
dead indeed to sin, but living to God in Christ Jesus.

2 [6:12]Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, to obey its
desires, [6:13]neither present your members as instruments of
wickedness to sin, but present yourselves to God as living from the
dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness to God.
[6:14]For sin shall not have a Lordship over you; for you are not under
the law but under the grace.

3 [6:15]What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but
under the grace? By no means. [6:16]Know you not that to whom you
present yourselves servants for obedience, his servants you are whom
you obey, whether of sin in death or of obedience in righteousness?
[6:17]But thanks be to God that you were servants of sin, but obeyed
from the heart the form of teaching in which you were instructed,
[6:18]and having become free from sin you served righteousness. [6:19]I
speak after the manner of men on account of the weakness of your flesh.
For as you presented your members servants to impurity and to
wickedness in wickedness, so now present your members servants to
righteousness in sanctification. [6:20]For when you were servants of
sin, you were free from righteousness. [6:21]What fruit had you
therefore then in things of which you are now ashamed? for the end of
them is death. [6:22]But now having been made free from sin and made
servants to God, you have your fruit in sanctification, and the end
eternal life. [6:23]For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God
is eternal life by Christ Jesus our Lord.




