CHAPTER VI. THOSE IN CHRIST NOT SUBJECT TO CONDEMNATION, NOR TO THE FLESH, BUT RULED BY THE HOLY SPIRIT, ETC.


1 [8:1]THERE is no condemnation therefore to those in Christ Jesus;
[8:2]for the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free
from the law of sin and death. [8:3]For what the law could not do
because it was weak through the flesh, God having sent his Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned the sin in the flesh,
[8:4]that the righteous ordinance of the law may be performed by us who
walk not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. [8:5]For
they who are according to the flesh mind the things of the flesh, but
they who are according to the spirit the things of the spirit; [8:6]
for the minding of the flesh is death, but the minding of the Spirit is
life and peace. [8:7]Because the minding of the flesh is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the law of God; for it can not be.
[8:8]And they that are in the flesh cannot please God. [8:9]But you are
not in the flesh but in the spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells
in you. And if any man has not the spirit of Christ he is not his.
[8:10]But if Christ is in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but
the spirit is life on account of righteousness. [8:11]And if the Spirit
of him that raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he that raised
Christ from the dead shall make alive your mortal bodies through his
Spirit that dwells in you.

2 [8:12]Therefore, brothers, we are debtors not to the flesh to live
according to the flesh. [8:13]For if you live according to the flesh,
you shall die; but if by the spirit you kill the deeds of the body, you
shall live. [8:14]For as many as are led by the Spirit of God they are
sons of God. [8:15]For you received not the spirit of servitude again
to fear, but you received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry;
Abba, Father. [8:16]The Spirit itself is a co-witness with our spirits
that we are children of God. [8:17]And if children, [we are] also
heirs, heirs indeed of God and co-heirs with Christ, if we suffer with
him that we may also be glorified with him.

3 [8:18]For I think that the sufferings of the present time are of no
account in comparison with the glory to be revealed in us.  [8:19]For
the earnest expectation of the creation waits for the revelation of the
sons of God. [8:20] For the creation was subjected to a perishable
condition, not willingly, but by him that subjected it, in hope
[8:21]that the same creation will be delivered from the servitude of
destruction and [brought] into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
[8:22]For we know that all the creation groans and is in pain till now;
[8:23]and not only it, but we ourselves also who have the first fruit
of the Spirit, even ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the
adoption, the redemption of our bodies. [8:24]For we are saved by hope;
but a hope that is seen is not a hope; for why does one hope for what
he sees? [8:25]but if we hope for what we see not, we wait for it with
patience.

4 [8:26]And in like manner also the Spirit helps our weakness.  For we
know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit makes
intercession for us with groanings unutterable; [8:27]and he that
searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because it
makes intercession with God for the saints. [8:28]And we know that all
things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are
called according to [his] purpose.  [8:29]For whom he foreknew, he also
predestinated to be conformed to the likeness of his Son, that he may
be a first-born among many brothers; [8:30]and whom he predestinated
them he also called; and whom he called them he also justified; and
whom he justified them he also glorified.

5 [8:31]What shall we say then to these things? If God is for us, who
is against us? [8:32]He who spared not his Son, but gave him up for us
all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all things?
[8:33]Who will bring a charge against God's elect? It is God that
justifies; [8:34]who is he that condemns? Is it Christ who died, and
still more, who has also been raised, and who is on the right hand of
God, and who makes intercession for us?  [8:35]Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? Shall affliction or distress, persecution or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? [8:36]As it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day; we are accounted as sheep for
slaughter.  [8:37]But in all these things we more than conquer, through
him who loved us. [8:38]For I am persuaded that neither death nor life,
nor angels nor principalities, nor things present nor things to come,
nor powers, [8:39]nor height, nor depth, nor any other creation, shall
be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.




