CHAPTER VIII. THE SALVATION OF BELIEVING JEWS AND THE CALLING OF THE GENTILES.


1 [11:1]I SAY then, has God cast away his people? By no means; for I
also am an Israelite, of the race of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
[11:2]God has not cast away his people whom he foreknew. Know you not
what the Scripture says in Elijah, how he intercedes with God against
Israel? [11:3]Lord, they have killed thy prophets, they have dug down
thy altars, and I am left alone, and they seek my life. [11:4]But what
says the response to him? I have reserved for myself seven thousand
men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal. [11:5]So then also at the
present time there is a remnant according to the election of grace;
[11:6] but if by grace, no longer by works; for otherwise grace is no
longer grace; but if by works, it is no longer grace; for otherwise a
work is no longer a work. [11:7]What then? What Israel seeks, this it
did not obtain, but the election obtained; and the rest were
hardened,-- [11:8]as it is written, God gave them a spirit of stupor,
eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear--to
this day. [11:9]And David says, Let their table become a trap and a
snare and an offense and a stumbling block to them; [11:10]let their
eyes be darkened that they may not see, and bow down their back always.

2 [11:11]I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? By no
means; but by their fall the nations have salvation to excite them to
emulation. [11:12] But if their fall is the riches of the world, and
their diminution the riches of nations, how much more will their
fullness be. [11:13]For I speak to you, gentiles.  Inasmuch as I am an
apostle of the gentiles, I glorify my ministry, [11:14]if perhaps I may
excite my flesh [race] to emulation and save some of them. [11:15]For
if their falling away is the reconciling of the world, what will their
recovery be but life from the dead? [11:16]And if the first fruit is
holy, the mass is also; and if the root is holy, the branches also are.

3 [11:17]But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a
wild olive, were grafted in among them and became a partaker of the
root and excellence of the olive, [11:18]boast not against the
branches; but if you boast, you bear not the root, but the root you.
[11:19]You will say then, The branches were broken off that I might be
grafted in. [11:20]Well; they were broken off by unbelief, and you
stand by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear; [11:21]for if God spared
not the natural branches, perhaps he will not spare you. [11:22]See
then the goodness and severity of God; towards those that fell,
severity, but towards you, the goodness of God, if you continue in
goodness, for otherwise you also will be cut off. [11:23]And they, if
they continue not in unbelief, will be grafted in; for God is able to
graft them in again. [11:24] For if you have been cut from an olive
wild by nature, and grafted contrary to nature into a good olive, how
much more shall they according to nature be grafted into their own
olive.

4 [11:25]For I wish you not to be ignorant, brothers, of this mystery;
that you may not be wise in your own conceit. For hardness in part has
come upon Israel, till the fullness of the gentiles shall come in,
[11:26]and so all Israel shall be saved; as it is written, A deliverer
shall come from Zion, he shall turn away impiety from Jacob. [11:27]And
this is the promise to them from me, when I take away their sins.
[11:28]As to the gospel, they are enemies on your account, but as to
the election, they are beloved on account of the fathers; [11:29]for
the gifts and calling of God are without a change of mind. [11:30]For
as you once disobeyed God, but now have obtained mercy by their
disobedience, [11:31]so also they now have disobeyed that they may
obtain mercy by your mercy. [11:32] For God has concluded all in
disobedience that he may have mercy on all. [11:33] O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how inscrutable are his
judgments, and his ways can not be explored!  [11:34]For who knew the
mind of the Lord? or who was his counsellor? [11:35]or who first gave
to him, and it shall be repaid him? [11:36]For of him and through him,
and in him are all things; to him be glory forever; amen.




