CHAPTER XV. CHRIST TRANSFIGURED.--CURING A DEMONIAC, AND PAYING THE SACRED TRIBUTE.


1 [17:1]AND after six days Jesus took Peter, and James, and John, his
brother, and led them up on a high mountain by themselves.  [17:2]And
he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and
his garments were white as the light. [17:3]And behold there appeared
to them Moses and Elijah conversing with him. [17:4]And Peter answered
and said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here; if you please,
we will make here three tabernacles, one for you, and one for Moses,
and one for Elijah.  [17:5]While he was yet speaking, behold a bright
cloud overshadowed them; and behold a voice from the cloud, saying,
This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; hear him.
[17:6]And when they heard this the disciples fell on their faces, and
were greatly afraid. [17:7]And Jesus came and touched them, and said,
Arise, and be not afraid. [17:8]And lifting up their eyes they saw no
man, except Jesus alone.

2 [17:9]And when they went down from the mountain Jesus charged them,
saying, Tell no man the vision till the Son of man is raised from the
dead. [17:10]And the disciples asked him, saying, Why then do the
scribes say that Elijah must first come?  [17:11]And he answered and
said, Elijah indeed comes, and shall restore all things. [17:12]But I
tell you Elijah has come already, and they knew him not, but did to him
what they pleased.  In like manner, also, the Son of man is about to
suffer from them. [17:13]Then the disciples understood that he spoke to
them of John the Baptist.

3 [17:14]And when they came to the multitude, a man came to him,
kneeling to him and saying, [17:15]Lord, have mercy on my son, for he
is a lunatic, and suffers greatly. For he often falls into the fire,
and often into the water. [17:16]And I brought him to your disciples
and they could not cure him. [17:17] Jesus answered and said, O
unbelieving and perverse generation! How long shall I be with you? How
long shall I suffer you? Bring him here to me. [17:18]And Jesus rebuked
him, and the demon went out of him, and the child was cured from that
hour. [17:19]Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, Why
could we not cast it out? [17:20]And Jesus said to them, On account of
your unbelief. For I tell you truly, if you have a faith like a mustard
seed, you shall say to this mountain, Be removed thence to that place,
and it shall be removed; and nothing shall be impossible to you.
[17:21]But this kind goes not out, except by prayer and fasting.

4 [17:22]And as they were returning in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The
Son of man is about to be delivered into the hands of men, [17:23]and
they will kill him, and on the third day he shall be raised; and they
were grieved exceedingly.

5 [17:24]And when they came to Capernaum, those who received the
didrachma [28 cents], came to Peter, and said, Does not your teacher
pay the didrachma? [17:25]He said, Yes. And when he came into the
house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What do you think, Simon? From
whom do the kings of the earth receive taxes, or a tribute? From their
children, or from strangers? [17:26]He said to him, From strangers.
Jesus said to him; Then are the children free; [17:27]but that we may
not offend them, go to the lake, and cast in a hook, and take the first
fish that comes up, and opening its mouth you will find a stater [56
cents]. Take that and give it to them, for me and you.




