CHAPTER X. DUTIES TO THE WEAK, ETC.


1 [14:1]RECEIVE the weak in faith, not to doubtful reasonings.
[14:2]For one has faith to eat all things, but he that is weak eats
vegetables. [14:3]Let not him that eats despise him that eats not; and
let not him that eats not judge him that eats; for God has accepted
him. [14:4]Who are you that judge another man's servant? To his master
he stands or falls; and he shall be made to stand, for God is able to
make him stand.

2 [14:5]One judges one day to be better than another, but another
judges every day [to be alike]. Let each one be fully persuaded in his
mind. [14:6]He that observes the day observes it to the Lord, and he
that observes not the day observes it not to the Lord. And he that eats
eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks; and he that eats not eats
not to the Lord, and gives God thanks.  [14:7] For no one of us lives
for himself; and no one dies for himself; [14:8]for if we live, we live
for the Lord, and if we die, we die for the Lord; whether therefore we
live, or whether we die, we are the Lord's. [14:9]For this end Christ
died and lived again, that he might exercise lordship over the dead and
living. [14:10]But why do you judge your brother? why do you set at
nought your brother? for we must all stand at the tribunal of God.
[14:11]For it is written, [As] I live, says the Lord, to me every knee
shall bow, and every tongue confess to God.  [14:12]Each of us
therefore shall give account of himself to God.

3 [14:13]Let us not therefore judge one another, but judge this rather,
not to place a stumbling-block or an offense before a brother. [14:14]I
know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is defiled in
itself, except to him that thinks any thing to be defiled; to him it is
defiled. [14:15]For if your brother is grieved by your food, you no
longer walk in love. Destroy not with your food him for whom Christ
died. [14:16]Let not your good therefore be injuriously spoken of.
[14:17]For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit; [14:18]for he
that in this serves Christ is well pleasing to God and approved by men.
[14:19]Let us therefore pursue the things of peace and those which
edify one another.  [14:20]On account of food destroy not the work of
God. All things indeed are pure, but evil is to the man that eats with
offense; [14:21]it is good not to eat meat nor drink wine, nor [do] any
thing by which your brother stumbles. [14:22]You have faith; have it
for yourself before God, Blessed is he that condemns not himself in
what he approves; [14:23]but he that doubts is condemned if he eats,
because it is not of faith; and every thing which is not of faith is
sin.

4 [15:1]And we, the strong, ought to bear the infirmities of those who
are not strong, and not to please ourselves. [15:2]Let us each please
our neighbor in that which is good for edification; [15:3]for Christ
also pleased not himself, but, as it is written, The reproaches of
those that reproached thee fell on me. [15:4]For those things which
were written before were written for our instruction, that through
patience and the consolation of the Scriptures we may have hope.
[15:5]And the God of patience and consolation grant you to have the
same mind one to another, according to Christ Jesus, [15:6]that being
of one mind you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
with one mouth.

5 [15:7]Wherefore receive one another, as Christ also received you to
the glory of God. [15:8]For I say that Christ was made a minister of
the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises of the
fathers, [15:9]and that the nations should glorify God for mercy; as it
is written, For this cause will I praise thee among nations, and sing
to thy name. [15:10]And again he says, Rejoice nations with his people.
[15:11]And again, Praise the Lord, all nations, and let all peoples
praise him.  [15:12]And again, Isaiah says, There shall be a root of
Jesse and he shall stand up to rule nations, in him shall nations hope.
[15:13]And may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.

6 [15:14]And I am persuaded, my brothers, even I myself, concerning
you, that you are full of kindness, filled with all knowledge, and able
to admonish one another; [15:15]but I have written more boldly to you
in part, to refresh your minds on account of the grace given me by God
[15:16]that I should be a servant of Christ Jesus to the nations,
administering as a priest the gospel of God, that the offering of the
nations may be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit. [15:17]I have
therefore cause of boasting in Christ Jesus in respect to things
relating to God; [15:18]for I dare not to speak of what Christ has not
performed by me for the obedience of the nations, by word and work,
[15:19]by the power of miracles and prodigies, by the power of the
Spirit, so that from Jerusalem and around as far as Illyricum I have
fully preached the gospel of Christ. [15:20]And I have been anxious so
to preach where Christ was not named, that I might not build on
another's foundation; [15:21]but as it is written, They shall see to
whom nothing was told concerning him, and they who have not heard shall
understand.

7 [15:22]Wherefore I was also much hindered from coming to you;
[15:23]but now having no longer a place in these regions, and having a
desire to come to you for many years, [15:24]should I go to Spain I
will come to you; for I hope, going by, to see you, and to be sent
forward by you there, when first I am in part filled with you.
[15:25]But now I am going to Jerusalem to serve the saints. [15:26]For
Macedonia and Achaia have been pleased to make some contribution for
the poor of the saints at Jerusalem.  [15:27]They have been pleased
indeed, and their debtors they are; for if the nations have
participated in their spiritual things, they ought also to serve them
in things pertaining to the flesh.  [15:28]Having therefore performed
this, and sealed to them this service, I will go by you to Spain;
[15:29]and I know that when I come to you I shall come in the fullness
of the blessing of Christ. [15:30]But I exhort you by the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in
prayers to God for me, [15:31]that I may be delivered from those that
obey not in Judea, and that my service which is for Jerusalem may be
acceptable to the saints, [15:32]that I may come to you with joy by the
will of God, and be refreshed together with you.  [15:33]And may the
God of peace be with you all; amen.




