CHAPTER XI. COMMENDATION OF PHOEBE, SALUTATIONS, ETC.


1 [16:1]AND I commend to you Phoebe our sister, who is a minister of
the church in Cenchrea, [16:2]that you receive her in the Lord worthily
of the saints, and assist her in any thing in which she may have need
of you; for she has been an assistant of many, and of myself also.

2 [16:3]Salute Prisca [Priscilla] and Aquila my co-laborers in Christ
Jesus, [16:4]who exposed their necks for my life, to whom not only I
give thanks but all the churches of the nations; [16:5]and [salute] the
assembly at their house. Salute Epenetus my beloved, who is the first
fruit of Asia to Christ.  [16:6]Salute Mary, who labored much for us.
[16:7]Salute Andronicus and Junius, my relatives and my
fellow-captives, who are distinguished among the apostles, and who were
before me in Christ. [16:8]Salute Amplias my beloved in the Lord.
[16:9]Salute Urbanus our co-laborer in Christ, and Stachus my beloved.
[16:10]Salute Apelles, the approved in Christ. Salute those of the
[family] of Aristobulus. [16:11]Salute Herodion, my relative.  Salute
those of the [family] of Narcissus who are in the Lord.  [16:12]Salute
Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labored in the Lord.  Salute Persis the
beloved, who labored much in the Lord.  [16:13]Salute Rufus the elect
in the Lord, and his mother and mine. [16:14]Salute Asyncritus,
Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them.
[16:15]Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas,
and all the saints with them. [16:16]Salute one another with a holy
kiss. All the churches of Christ salute you.

3 [16:17]I exhort you, brothers, to observe those that cause
dissensions and offenses contrary to the teaching which you learned,
and avoid them; [16:18]for such serve not our anointed Lord, but
themselves, And by kind and complimentary words deceive the minds of
the simple. [16:19]For your obedience has come to all; I rejoice in you
therefore, but I wish you to be wise for that which is good, and simple
for evil. [16:20]And the God of peace shall crush Satan under your feet
shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

4 [16:21]Timothy my co-laborer salutes you, and Lucius and Jason and
Sosipater, my relatives. [16:22]I, Tertius, who wrote the epistle,
salute you in the Lord. [16:23]Gaius my entertainer, and the
entertainer of all the church, salutes you. Erastus the treasurer of
the city and Quartus the brother salute you.  [16:24]The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all; amen.

5 [16:25]And to him that is able to confirm you according to my gospel,
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the
mystery not revealed in ancient times, [16:26]but made manifest now by
the scriptures of the prophets, by the command of the eternal God, for
the obedience of the faith among all nations, [16:27]to the only wise
God, through Jesus Christ, to him be the glory forever; amen.




THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON.


ROME, A.D. 63. (ACTS 25:4.)

CONCERNING ONESIMUS, ETC.

1 [1:1]PAUL, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy the brother, to
the beloved. Philemon and our fellow-laborer, [1:2]and to the beloved
Apphia, and to Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the assembly at
your house. [1:3]Grace be to you and peace from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ.

2 [1:4]I thank my God, always making mention of you in my prayers,
[1:5] hearing of your love and faith which you have for the Lord Jesus
and for all the saints, [1:6]that your participation of the faith may
be made effectual by a knowledge of all the good which we have in
Christ Jesus. [1:7]For I have great joy and comfort in your love,
because the saints are refreshed by you, brother. [1:8]Wherefore,
having great boldness to command you what is fit, [1:9]on account of
love I rather request; being such as Paul the aged, and now also a
prisoner of Christ Jesus, [1:10]I request you for my son Onesimus, whom
I obtained in my bonds, [1:11]who was formerly not useful to you but is
now most useful to you and me, [1:12]whom I have sent back. And do you
receive him, that is, my soul, [1:13]whom I should like to retain for
myself, that he might serve me for you in the bonds of the gospel,
[1:14]but without your consent I will do nothing, that your service may
not be compulsory but voluntary; [1:15]for perhaps he has been
separated from you for a time that you may have him back forever,
[1:16]no longer as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved,
especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in
the Lord.  [1:17]If therefore you regard me as a friend receive him as
myself. [1:18]If he injured you, or owes you any thing, set it to my
account. [1:19]I, Paul, have written with my hand; I will pay; not to
tell you that you owe yourself to me. [1:20]Yes, brother, let me be
profited by you in the Lord; refresh my soul in Christ.

3 [1:21]I have written to you, having confidence in your obedience,
knowing that you will do even more than I say.  [1:22]But at the same
time also prepare me a lodging; for I hope that through your prayers I
shall be given to you.  [1:23]Epaphras, who is my fellow-captive in
Christ Jesus, [1:24]Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my co-laborers,
salute you.  [1:25]The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit.





