CHAPTER II. MORAL DUTIES, ETC.


1 [3:1]IF you, therefore, have been raised with Christ, seek the things
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; [3:2]employ your
minds on things above, not on things on the earth. [3:3]For you have
died, and your life is hid with Christ in God; [3:4]when Christ your
life shall be made manifest, then shall you also be made manifest in
glory.

2 [3:5]Put to death, therefore, your members which are on the earth,
fornication, impurity, passion, evil desire, and covetousness which is
idolatry, [3:6]for which comes the wrath of God. [3:7]In which also you
walked formerly when you lived in them; [3:8]but now do you put away
also all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, vile conversation out
of your mouth; [3:9]lie not one to another; put off the old man with
his doings, [3:10]and put on the new man, renewed in knowledge in the
likeness of him that created him, [3:11]where there are not Greek and
Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, servant,
freeman, but Christ is all things and in all.

3 [3:12]Put on, therefore, as elect and beloved saints of God, hearts
of compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, long-suffering,
[3:13]forbearing one another, and forgiving one another if any one has
a charge against any, as Christ forgave you, so [do] you also,
[3:14]and in addition to all these [put on] love, which is the bond of
perfection. [3:15]And let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, for
which you have been called in one body; and be thankful. [3:16]Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching with all wisdom, and
admonishing one another, with psalms, hymns, spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to God, [3:17]and whatever you do in word or
in work, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to the God
[and] Father through him.

4 [3:18]Wives, be subject to the husbands, as is fit in the Lord.
[3:19] Husbands, love the wives and be not bitter to them.
[3:20]Children, obey [your] parents in all things; for this is well
pleasing in the Lord. [3:21]Fathers, be not fault-finding with your
children, that they be not discouraged. [3:22] Servants, obey in all
things masters according to the flesh, not with eye service, as those
pleasing men, but with a sincere heart, fearing the Lord. [3:23]And
whatever you do, work heartily, as for the Lord and not for men;
[3:24]knowing that you will receive from the Lord the recompense of the
inheritance. You serve Christ the Lord; [3:25]for he that does wrong
shall receive for the wrong which he has done, and there is no respect
of persons. [4:1]Masters, render to your servants what is just and
equal, knowing also that you have a master in heaven.

5 [4:2]Be constant in prayer, watching in it with thanksgiving,
[4:3]praying also at the same time for us, that God will open to us a
door of utterance to declare the mystery of Christ, for which also I am
bound, [4:4]that I may declare it plainly, as I ought to speak.
[4:5]Walk in wisdom towards those without, redeeming the time. [4:6]Let
your words always be with kindness, seasoned with salt, that you may
know how to answer every one.

6 [4:7]Tychicus will inform you of all things relating to me, who is a
beloved brother, and faithful minister, and fellow-servant in the Lord,
[4:8]whom I have sent to you for this purpose, that he may know your
affairs and comfort your hearts, [4:9]with Onesimus the faithful and
beloved brother, who is of you; they will tell you of all things here.

7 [4:10]Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner salutes you, and Mark the nephew
of Barnabas,--concerning whom you received commandments, if he comes to
you receive him,-- [4:11]and Jesus called Justus, who are of the
circumcision; these are the only co-laborers for the kingdom of God who
have been a comfort to me. [4:12]Epaphras, who is of you, a servant of
Christ Jesus, salutes you, always striving for you in prayers that you
may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. [4:13]For I bear
him witness that he has great zeal for you and for those in Laodicea,
and for those in Hierapolis. [4:14]Luke the beloved physician, and
Demas, salute you. [4:15]Salute the brothers in Laodicea, and Nymphas,
and the assembly at his house. [4:16]And when this letter has been read
with you, cause that it be also read by the church of the Laodiceans;
and do you also read that from Laodicea.  [4:17]And say to Archippus,
Attend to your ministry which you received in the Lord, to perform it
fully. [4:18]The salutation with my hand, Paul's. Remember my bonds.
The grace be with you.





