THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS [LAODICEANS]. CHAPTER I. THE BENEFICENCE OF GOD TO THE ELECT, CHRIST THE SAVIOUR, THE SALVATION OF THE GENTILES, ETC.


ROME, A.D. 63. (ACTS 25:4.) 

1 [1:1]PAUL, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the
saints in [Ephesus] and the faithful in Christ Jesus.  [1:2]Grace be to
you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 [1:3]Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly [worlds] in
Christ, [1:4]as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and blameless before him, [1:5]having
predestinated us in love to an adoption through Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, [1:6]to the praise
of his glorious grace, which he bestowed upon us in the beloved,
[1:7]in whom we have the redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins, according to the riches of his grace, [1:8]which he bestowed
on us abundantly with all wisdom and knowledge [1:9]making known to us
the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he
purposed in himself [1:10]in respect to the dispensation of the
fullness of times, to bring all things into one in Christ, the things
which are in heaven and the things which are on earth, in him [1:11]in
whom also we have been called, having been predestinated according to
the purpose of him who works out all things according to the counsel of
his will, [1:12]that we should be for a praise of his glory, who first
trusted in Christ; [1:13]in whom also you, when you heard the word of
truth, the gospel of your salvation, in whom also you having believed
were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, [1:14]which is a pledge of
our inheritance for the redemption of the purchased possession, to the
praise of his glory.

3 [1:15]Therefore, I also, having heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus
and love to all the saints, [1:16]do not cease to give thanks for you,
making mention of you in my prayers, [1:17]that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him; [1:18]the eyes of your minds being
enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of his call, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, [1:19]and
what the exceeding greatness of his power towards us who believe,
according to the operation of his mighty power, [1:20]which he
performed in Christ, when he raised him from the dead and seated him at
his right hand in the heavenly [worlds], [1:21]above every principality
and authority and power and lordship, and every name that is named, not
only in this life but also in that to come, [1:22]and put all things in
subjection under his feet, and made him head over all things to the
church, [1:23]which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all
things in all.

4 [2:1]And you being dead in trespasses and sins,-- [2:2]in which you
formerly walked according to the life of this world, according to the
ruler of the power of the air, the spirit which now operates in the
children of disobedience, [2:3] among whom also we all formerly lived
in the desires of our flesh, performing the wishes of the flesh and the
mind, and were by nature children of wrath even as others; [2:4]but God
who is rich in mercy, on account of his great love with which he loved
us,-- [2:5]even when we were dead in sins he made us alive with
Christ,--by grace are you saved, [2:6]and raised us up and seated us
together with Christ Jesus in the heavenly worlds, [2:7]that he might
show in the ages to come the transcendent riches of his grace in
goodness to us by Jesus Christ. [2:8]For by grace are you saved through
the faith; and that not of you; [it is] the gift of God; [2:9]not of
works, that no one may boast; [2:10]for we are his creation, created in
Christ Jesus for good works, in which God before appointed that we
should walk.

5 [2:11]Wherefore, remember that you were formerly gentiles by birth,
called uncircumcision by that called circumcision made in the flesh by
the hand, [2:12] that at that time you were without Christ, alienated
from the polity of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise,
having no hope and without God in the world; [2:13]but now, in Christ
Jesus you who were formerly far off have been made nigh by the blood of
Christ. [2:14]For he is our peace, who made both one and broke down the
middle wall of partition, [2:15]the enmity, and abolished by his flesh
the law of commandments [consisting] of ordinances, that of the two he
might create in himself one new man, making peace, [2:16]and reconcile
both in one body to God through the cross, having destroyed the enmity
by it. [2:17]And he came and preached the good news of peace to you who
were far off, and peace to those nigh, [2:18]for through him we both
have access by one spirit to the Father. [2:19]Therefore you are no
longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow-citizens of the
saints and of the family of God, [2:20]being built on the foundation of
the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner-stone, [2:21]by which all the building being fitted together
grows into a holy temple in the Lord, [2:22]in which you also are built
up together for a spiritual habitation of God.

6 [3:1]For this cause I Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
gentiles, [3:2]if indeed you heard of the dispensation of the grace of
God given to me for you, [3:3]that by revelation the mystery was made
known to me,--as I wrote before in a few words, [3:4]by reading which
you can understand my knowledge of the mystery of Christ,-- [3:5]which
in other generations was not made known to the children of men as it
has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit,
[3:6]that the gentiles are co-heirs and of the same body and joint
partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel, [3:7]of
which I was made a minister by the gracious gift of God, given to me by
the operation of his power. [3:8]To me, who am the least of all saints,
was this grace given, to preach to the nations the unsearchable riches
of Christ, [3:9]and to enlighten all men as to the dispensation of the
mystery concealed from eternity in God who created all things,
[3:10]that now to the principalities and powers in the heavenly
[worlds] should be made known, through the church, the manifold wisdom
of God, [3:11]according to the eternal purpose which he made in Christ
Jesus our Lord, [3:12]in whom we have boldness and access with
confidence through faith in him.

7 [3:13]Wherefore I desire you not to faint on account of my
afflictions for you, which are your glory. [3:14]For this reason I bow
my knees to the Father, [3:15]of whom all the family in heaven and on
earth is named, [3:16]that he would grant to you according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power through his Spirit
in the inward man, [3:17]that Christ may dwell in your hearts through
the faith, you being founded and established in love, [3:18]that you
may be able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and
length, and depth and height, [3:19]and to know the love of Christ
which exceeds knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness
of God.  [3:20]To him that is able to do far beyond all that we ask or
think, by the power which operates in us, [3:21]to him be the glory in
the church in Jesus Christ to all generations, for ever and ever; amen.




