CHAPTER II. PERSONAL AND SOCIAL DUTIES.


1 [4:1]I THEREFORE, the prisoner of the Lord, exhort you to walk
worthily of the call with which you were called, [4:2]with all humility
and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love,
[4:3]using diligence to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. [4:4]There is one body, and one spirit, as you also are called
in one hope of your call; [4:5]one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
[4:6]one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in
all. [4:7]And to each one of us is given grace according to the measure
of the gift of Christ.

2 [4:8]Wherefore he says, When he ascended on high, he took captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men. [4:9]But this, that he ascended, what
is it but that he first descended into the lower parts of the earth?
[4:10]He that descended is the same also that ascended above all
heavens, that he might fill all [places].  [4:11]And he gave some
apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers, [4:12]for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edification of the body of Christ, [4:13]till we all
come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, [4:14] that we may be no longer children, driven about like
waves and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the art of men,
and the craftiness of deceitful wiles, [4:15]but speaking the truth
with love we may grow to him in all things, who is the head, Christ;
[4:16]by whom all the body being joined together and compacted by the
supply of every joint, according to the proportionate operation of
every part, makes increase of the body to the edification of itself in
love.

3 [4:17]This I say then and testify in the Lord, that you no longer
walk as the other gentiles walk, in the vanity of their minds,
[4:18]with their understandings darkened, alienated from the life of
God on account of the ignorance which is in them, on account of the
hardness of their hearts, [4:19] who being without feeling have given
themselves up to lewdness, to commit every impurity with greediness.
[4:20]But you have not so learned Christ, [4:21]if you have indeed
heard him, and been instructed by him as the truth is in Jesus,
[4:22]that you should lay aside your former mode of life the old man
destroyed by deceitful desires, [4:23]and be renewed in the spirit of
your minds, [4:24] and put on the new man, created after God in
righteousness and true holiness.

4 [4:25]Wherefore, laying aside lying let every one speak the truth to
his neighbor, for we are members one of another.  [4:26]Be angry and
sin not; let not the sun go down on your wrath, [4:27]neither give
place to the devil. [4:28]Let him that has stolen steal no more, but
rather let him labor, doing that which is good with his hands, that he
may have to give to him that needs. [4:29]Let no evil word proceed out
of your mouth, but that which is good for useful edification, that it
may afford benefit to those that hear. [4:30]And grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God, by which you were sealed to the day of redemption.
[4:31]Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
blasphemy, be banished from among you, with all malice. [4:32]But be
kind one to another, merciful, giving one to another, as God also in
Christ gave to you. [5:1]Be therefore followers of God, as dear
children, [5:2]and walk in love, as Christ also loved us and gave
himself for us, an offering and sacrifice to God of good odor.

5 [5:3]Let not fornication and any impurity or covetousness be named
among you, as becomes saints, [5:4]nor indecorum and foolish talking,
or jesting, things not becoming, but rather giving of thanks. [5:5]For
you know this, that no fornicator, or impure, or covetous person, who
is an idolater, has an inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
[5:6]Let no man deceive you with vain words; for on account of these
comes the wrath of God on the children of disobedience. [5:7]Be not
therefore partakers with them. [5:8]For you were formerly darkness, but
now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,-- [5:9]for
the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and
truth,-- [5:10]proving what is well pleasing to the Lord, [5:11]and be
not partakers of the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them. [5:12] For the things which are done by them in secret it is base
even to mention; [5:13]but all things proved to be wrong are made
manifest by the light; for every thing which makes manifest is light.
[5:14]Wherefore he says, Awake you that sleep, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give you light.

6 [5:15]See then that you walk discreetly, not as unwise but as wise,
[5:16] redeeming the time, because the days are evil.  [5:17]Be not
foolish therefore, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
[5:18]And be not drunk with wine, in which is excess, but be filled
with the spirit, [5:19]speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs, singing and making music in your hearts to the Lord,
[5:20]giving thanks always for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ to the God and Father, [5:21]being subject one to another in the
fear of Christ. [5:22]Let wives [be subject] to their husbands as to
the Lord, [5:23]for the husband is the head of the wife, as also Christ
is the head of the church; he is the savior of the body.  [5:24]But as
the church is subject to Christ, so also let wives be subject to
husbands in every thing. [5:25] Husbands, love your wives as Christ
also loved the church and gave himself for it, [5:26]that he might
sanctify it, purifying it with the washing of water with the word,
[5:27]that he might present the church to himself glorious, not having
a spot or wrinkle or any thing of the kind, but that it should be holy
and blameless.  [5:28]Husbands ought to love their wives as their own
bodies. He that loves his wife loves himself; [5:29]for no one ever
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ also the
church; [5:30]for we are members of his body. [5:31]For this cause a
man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. [5:32]This is a great mystery; but I speak
of Christ and the church. [5:33]But do you also, individually, each one
so love his wife as himself, and the wife [see] that she reverences the
husband.

7 [6:1]Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right.
[6:2]Honor your father and your mother, which is the first commandment
with a promise, [6:3]that it may be well with you, and you shall live
long in the land. [6:4] And, fathers, provoke not your children, but
bring them up in the instruction and admonition of the Lord.

8 [6:5]Servants, be subject to masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in the sincerity of your hearts as to Christ,
[6:6]not with eye service as pleasing men, but as servants of Christ
doing the will of God from the heart, [6:7]performing service kindly as
to the Lord and not to men, [6:8] knowing that whatever good each one
does, for this he shall receive from the Lord, whether a servant or a
freeman. [6:9]And, masters, do the same things to them, forbearing
threatening, knowing also that their master and yours is in heaven, and
there is no respect of persons with him.

9 [6:10]Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
[6:11] Put on the whole armor of God that you may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil; [6:12]for our conflict is not against
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against
the potentates of the darkness of this world, against the spiritual
[hosts] of evil in the heavenly [worlds]. [6:13] Take therefore the
whole armor of God, that you may be able to resist in the evil day, and
having done all to stand. [6:14]Stand, therefore, girded about your
loins with truth, and having put on the cuirass of righteousness,
[6:15] and bound your feet with the preparation of the gospel of peace;
[6:16]over all, taking the shield of the faith, with which you may be
able to extinguish all the fiery darts of evil. [6:17]And take the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God, [6:18]praying with all prayer and supplication on every occasion
with the spirit, and watching in the same with all perseverance and
supplication for all the saints, [6:19]and for me, that a word may be
given me at the opening of my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of
the gospel, [6:20]in behalf of which I perform an embassy in bonds,
that I may speak boldly in them, as I ought to speak.

10 [6:21]But that you may also know the things concerning me, how I do,
Tichycus the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord will
inform you of all things; [6:22]whom I have sent to you for this
purpose, that you may know the things concerning us and that he may
comfort your hearts. [6:23]Peace and love be to the brothers with
faith, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. [6:24]The grace
be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with constancy.





