THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS. CHAPTER I. PAUL'S LOVE FOR THE PHILIPPIANS, AFFAIRS AT ROME, MORAL DUTIES, ETC.


ROME, A.D. 63. (ACTS, 25:4.) 

1 [1:1]PAUL and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in
Christ Jesus at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons.  [1:2]Grace be
to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

2 [1:3]I thank my God at every remembrance of you, [1:4]always in every
prayer of mine for you all making request with joy, [1:5]for your
fellowship in the gospel from the first day till now, [1:6]having this
same confidence, that he who has begun a good work in you will carry it
on till the day of Jesus Christ, [1:7]as it is right for me to think
this of you all, because I have you in my heart, both in my bonds and
in the defense and confirmation of the gospel, you being all partakers
of my grace.  [1:8]For God is my witness, how much I desire you all
with the tender affections of Christ Jesus. [1:9]And this I pray, that
your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all
understanding, [1:10]that you may prove the excellent, that you may be
without fault and without offense in the day of Christ, [1:11]filled
with the fruit of righteousness, through Jesus Christ, to the glory and
praise of God.

3 [1:12]But I wish you to know, brothers, that the things as to me have
resulted in the advancement of the gospel, [1:13]so that my bonds in
Christ are manifest in all the Praetorium and in all other places,
[1:14]and many of the brothers having been made confident by my bonds
in the Lord have more abundant courage to speak the word without fear.
[1:15]For some indeed preach Christ because of envy and strife, and
some also because of good will; [1:17]those from love, knowing that I
am set for the defense of the gospel, [1:16]but those from contention
preach Christ not sincerely, thinking to raise up affliction for my
bonds.  [1:18]What then? nevertheless, in every way, whether in
pretence or in truth, Christ is preached, and in this I rejoice. But I
also will rejoice; [1:19]for I know that this will result in salvation
to me, through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, [1:20]according to my expectation and hope that I shall be
ashamed in nothing, but with all boldness as always also now Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death.
[1:21]Because for me to live is Christ and to die is gain. [1:22]But if
to live in the flesh [is allowed me], I have this fruit of my work, and
which I shall choose I know not.  [1:23]But I am in a strait between
the two, having a desire to depart and be with Christ; for this is far
better; [1:24]but to continue in the flesh is more necessary for you.
[1:25]And fully believing this, I know that I shall continue, and
continue with you all, for your advancement and joy of the faith,
[1:26]that your rejoicing may abound in Christ Jesus by me through my
coming again to you.

4 [1:27]Only conduct yourselves as citizens worthily of the gospel of
Christ, that whether I come and see you, or be absent, I may hear of
your affairs, that you stand firm in one spirit, striving together with
one mind for the faith of the gospel, [1:28]terrified in nothing by the
adversaries, which is to them a token of destruction, but to you of
salvation, and this from God; [1:29]because it was given to you in
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him but also to suffer for
him, [1:30]having the same conflict which you saw in me and now hear of
in me.

5 [2:1]If therefore there is any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
in love, if any participation of the Spirit, if any affections and
compassions, [2:2] fulfil my joy, that you have the same mind, having
the same love, sympathizing with each other, having one opinion.
[2:3]Do nothing in strife or vain glory, but in humility let each
esteem others better than himself, [2:4]and let each consider not his
own interests, but also those of others. [2:5]Let this mind be in you
which was also in Christ Jesus, [2:6]who being in the form of God
thought it not a robbery to be equal with God; [2:7]but he abased
himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of
man, [2:8]and being found in form like a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient even till death, and the death of the cross.
[2:9]Wherefore God also highly exalted him, and gave him a name which
is above every name, [2:10]that at the name of Jesus every knee shall
bow, of beings in heaven and in the earth and under the earth,
[2:11]and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.

6 [2:12]And so, my beloved, as you always obeyed, not in my presence
only, but now much more in my absence, work out your salvation with
fear and trembling; [2:13]for God works in you both to will and to work
of his good pleasure. [2:14]Do all things without complainings and
disputations, [2:15]that you may be blameless and sincere, children of
God without blame in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, in
which you shine as luminaries in the world, [2:16]holding fast the word
of life, for my glorying in the day of Christ, that I did not run in
vain, nor labor in vain. [2:17]But if I am even poured out as a
libation on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice and
congratulate you all; [2:18]do you also rejoice with the same joy and
congratulate me.

7 [2:19]But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you shortly,
that I may be refreshed when I know your affairs.  [2:20]For I have no
one like minded who really will care for your interests; [2:21]for all
seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ. [2:22]But you know his
tried virtue, that as a son with a father he has served with me in the
gospel. [2:23]Him therefore I hope to send to you as soon as I know how
it will be with me; [2:24]and I hope in the Lord that I also myself
shall come shortly.

8 [2:25]But I thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, the
brother and my fellow-laborer and fellow-soldier, but your apostle and
servant of my need, [2:26]for he greatly desired you all and was
anxious, because you heard that he was sick.  [2:27]For indeed he was
sick nigh to death; but God had mercy on him, and not on him only but
on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. [2:28]I have sent
him therefore the more diligently, that seeing him again you may
rejoice and I be less sorrowful. [2:29]Receive him therefore in the
Lord with all joy, and have such in estimation, [2:30]because on
account of the work he was nigh to death, not having consulted properly
for his life, that he might fully supply your lack of service to me.




