CHAPTER II. JUDAIZING TEACHERS, EXHORTATIONS, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, ETC.


1 [3:1]FINALLY, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord; for to write the same
things to you is not grievous to me, and is safe for you. [3:2]Beware
of the dogs, beware of evil laborers, beware of the concision. [3:3]We
are the circumcision, who serve God in spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and trust not in the flesh, [3:4]although I have ground of
confidence in the flesh. If any other one thinks he may trust in the
flesh, I [may] more; [3:5]circumcised the eighth day, of the race of
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews, as to the
law a Pharisee, [3:6]as to zeal persecuting the church, as to
righteousness by the law being blameless. [3:7]But whatever things were
my gain, these I have considered a loss for the sake of Christ.
[3:8]But for the same reason also I consider all things to be a loss on
account of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for
whose sake I have suffered the loss of all things, and consider them
worthless that I may gain Christ [3:9]and be found in him, not having
my righteousness by the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness of God by the faith, [3:10]that I may know
him, and the power of his resurrection, and the participation of his
sufferings, being conformed to his death, [3:11]that I may attain the
resurrection from the dead. [3:12]Not that I have already obtained it,
or have been already made perfect; but I follow on that I may attain
that for which also I was arrested by Christ. [3:13]I consider not
myself, brothers, to have attained it; but this one thing I do;
forgetting the things behind, and reaching forward to those before,
[3:14]I press forward to the mark for the prize of the high call of God
in Christ Jesus. [3:15]Let us, as many as are perfect therefore, be of
this mind; and if any one thinks at all otherwise, God shall also
reveal this to you; [3:16]but in what we have attained, in this let us
walk.

2 [3:17]Be followers of me, brothers, and observe those who walk so as
you have us for an example. [3:18]For many walk, of whom I told you
often and now also tell you weeping, that they are enemies of the cross
of Christ; [3:19]whose end is destruction, whose God is their stomach,
and their glory in their shame; who regard earthly things. [3:20]But
our kingdom is in heaven, from which also we expect the Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ, [3:21]who will change our humble body, and make it
like his glorious body, by the power by which he is able also to
subject all things to himself. [4:1]So, my beloved and much desired
brothers, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord, beloved.

3 [4:2]I beseech Euodias and I beseech Syntyche to have the same mind
in the Lord. [4:3]Yes, I beseech you also, faithful yoke-fellow, help
those women who strove in the gospel with me, with Clement and the rest
of my co-laborers, whose names are in the book of life.

4 [4:4]Rejoice in the Lord always; again I say, rejoice. [4:5]Let your
gentleness be known to all men; the Lord is near. [4:6]Be anxious for
nothing, but with all prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let
your requests be made known to God. [4:7]And may the peace of God which
passes all understanding keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

5 [4:8]Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are
honorable, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever
things are lovely, whatever things are reputable, if there is any
virtue, and if there is any praise, consider these things; [4:9]and
what you learned and received and heard and knew in me, these things
do; and the God of peace shall be with you.

6 [4:10]But I rejoice greatly in the Lord, that now at length you began
again to care for me, for whom also you did care, but had no
opportunity [to serve me]. [4:11]Not that I speak of want; for I have
learned in whatever circumstances I am to be contented.  [4:12]I know
both how to be humbled, and I know how to abound; in every thing and in
all conditions I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both
to abound and to suffer want. [4:13]I endure all things with him that
strengthens me. [4:14]But you did well to communicate with my
affliction, [4:15]And you know also, Philippians, that at the beginning
of the gospel, when I went out from Macedonia, no church communicated
with me in the matter of giving and receiving except you only;
[4:16]for even in Thessalonica and once and again you sent to my need.
[4:17]Not that I desire a gift, but I desire the fruit which abounds to
your account. [4:18]But I have all things and abound, I am fully
supplied, having received from Epaphroditus the things from you, a
perfume of good odor, an acceptable sacrifice, well pleasing to God.
[4:19]And God shall fully supply all your need, according to his riches
in glory in Christ Jesus. [4:20]To our God and Father be the glory
forever and ever; amen.

7 [4:21]Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers with me salute
you. [4:22]All the saints salute you, especially those of Caesar's
family. [4:23] The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirits.





