THE EPISTLE TO TITUS. CHAPTER I. A CHARGE TO TITUS IN RESPECT TO HIS MINISTRY.


PHILIPPI, A.D. 64. 

1 [1:1]PAUL, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the faith of God's elect, and the knowledge of the truth
which is according to piety, [1:2]for the hope of eternal life, which
God who cannot lie announced before eternal ages, [1:3]but manifested
his word in the times which were suitable for it by the preaching with
which I was intrusted, according to the command of our Saviour God,
[1:4]to Titus my faithful son in the common faith; grace and peace from
God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Saviour.

2 [1:5]For this cause I left you in Crete, that you might regulate
things which are deficient, and appoint elders in every city, as I
charged you, [1:6]if any one is blameless, a husband of one wife,
having faithful children, not accused of intemperance or of
insubordination. [1:7]For a bishop must be blameless as a steward of
God, not self-indulgent, not soon angry, not given to wine, not
contentious, not devoted to base gain, [1:8]but a lover of hospitality,
kind, sober, just, holy, self-denying, [1:9]holding firmly the faithful
word taught, that he may be able both to exhort with sound instruction
and to convince those who contradict. [1:10]For there are many
disorderly wranglers and deceivers, especially those of the
circumcision, [1:11]whom it is necessary to silence, who mislead whole
families, teaching for base gain what they ought not.

3 [1:12]A certain one of them, their own poet, said, Cretans are always
liars, evil beasts, lazy gormandizers. [1:13]This testimony is true.
Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
[1:14]not attending to Jewish myths, and commandments of men who
subvert the truth. [1:15]To the pure all things are pure; but to the
defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but their mind and conscience
are defiled. [1:16]They profess to know God, but by works deny him,
being abominable and disobedient, and as to every good work reprobate.

4 [2:1]Speak things which become sound teaching. [2:2]That the aged men
be sober, grave, of sound mind, sound in faith, in love, in patience;
[2:3]that the aged women, in like manner, be of behavior becoming
holiness, not slanderers, not enslaved to much wine, teachers of what
is good, [2:4]that they may instruct the young women to be lovers of
their husbands, lovers of their children, [2:5]sober, pure, fond of
home, kind, subject to their husbands, that the word of God may not be
blasphemed.

5 [2:6]In like manner exhort the younger to be of a sound mind, [2:7]
presenting yourself as an example of good works in all things, in
teaching [exhibiting] integrity, gravity, [2:8]sound argument not to be
condemned, that the adversary may be ashamed, having nothing evil to
say of us. [2:9]Let servants be subject to their masters, please them
in all things, not contradicting, [2:10]not pilfering, but showing all
good fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of our Saviour God in
all things.

6 [2:11]For the grace of God that pertains to salvation appeared to all
men, [2:12]teaching us, that denying impiety and worldly desires we
should live soberly, and righteously, and piously in the present life,
[2:13]looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the
great God and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, [2:14]who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all wickedness, and purify for himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

7 [2:15]These things speak, and exhort, and reprove with all authority;
let no man despise you. [3:1]Admonish them to be subject to
principalities, to powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready for every
good work, [3:2]to speak evil of no one, to be peaceable, gentle,
showing all meekness to all men. [3:3]For we formerly were foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving various desires and pleasures, living in
malice and envy, detestable, and hating one another; [3:4] but when the
goodness and philanthropy of the Saviour our God appeared, [3:5] not by
works of righteousness which we did but according to his mercy he saved
us through the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy
Spirit, [3:6]which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our
Saviour; [3:7] that having been justified by his grace we should become
heirs according to the hope of eternal life.  [3:8]The word is true,
and I wish you to insist strongly concerning these things, that those
who have believed in God may be careful to maintain good works. For
these things are honorable and useful to men. [3:9]But foolish
questions, and genealogies, and strifes and contentions about the law,
avoid; for they are unprofitable and vain. [3:10]A man that is a
heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject, [3:11]knowing
that such a one is subverted, and sins, being self-condemned.

8 [3:12]When I send you Artemas, or Tychicus, make haste to come to me
at Nicopolis; for there I have determined to spend the winter.
[3:13]Send forward Zenas the lawyer and Apollos with diligence, and let
nothing be wanting to them; [3:14]and let ours also learn to maintain
good works for necessary purposes, that they may not be unfruitful.
[3:15]All who are with me salute you.  Salute those who love us in the
faith. The grace be with you all.





