CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF GREATNESS.--OFFENSES AND THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.


1 [18:1]AT that time the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? [18:2]And calling a little child, he
set it in the midst of them, [18:3]and said, I tell you truly, that if
you do not turn and become like little children, you can by no means
enter into the kingdom of heaven.  [18:4]Whoever humbles himself like
this little child, shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven;
[18:5]and whoever receives one such little child in my name, receives
me; [18:6]but whoever offends one of these little ones that believe in
me, it would be better for him that a millstone should be hung to his
neck, and that he should be plunged into the depths of the sea.

2 [18:7]Woe to the world because of offenses! For offenses must
necessarily come, but woe to that man by whom the offense comes!
[18:8]If your hand or foot offends you, cut it off and cast it from
you. It is better for you to enter into life lame, or crippled, than
having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
[18:9]And if your eye offends you, pluck it out and cast it from you.
It is better for you to enter into life having one eye, than having two
eyes to be cast into the hell of fire.

3 [18:10]See that you despise not one of these little ones; for I tell
you that their angels always behold the face of my Father in heaven.
[18:12]What think you? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them is
lost, does he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountain, and go and
seek for the lost one? [18:13]And if he finds it, I tell you truly that
he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which were not lost.
[18:14]So it is not the will of your Father in heaven that one of these
little ones should perish.

4 [18:15]But if your brother sins against you, go and reprove him
between you and him alone. If he hears you, you have gained your
brother. [18:16]But if he does not hear you, take with you one or two
more, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established; [18:17]and if he will not hear them, tell the assembly;
and if he will not hear the assembly, let him be to you as a gentile
and a publican. [18:18]I tell you truly, that whatever you bind on the
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you unbind on the earth
shall be unbound in heaven.  [18:19]Again, I tell you, that if two of
you shall agree on the earth concerning any thing for which they shall
ask, they shall have it from my Father in heaven; [18:20]for where two
or three are assembled together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.

5 [18:21]Then came Peter and said to him, Lord, how many times shall my
brother sin against me and I forgive him? Till seven times?
[18:22]Jesus said to him, I say not to you till seven times, but till
seventy times seven. [18:23]On this account, the kingdom of heaven is
like a king who wished to settle with his servants. [18:24]And
beginning to settle, a debtor of ten thousand talents [$10,000,000] was
brought to him. [18:25]And he having nothing to pay, the lord commanded
him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and
payment to be made.  [18:26]Then the servant fell down and worshipped
him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay all. [18:27]And the
lord of that servant having compassion on him released him, and forgave
him the debt.

6 [18:28]But that servant went out and found one of his fellow-servants
who owed him one hundred denarii [$14], and seizing him, he choked him,
saying, Pay what you owe me.  [18:29]Then his fellow-servant fell down
and besought him, saying, Have patience with me and I will pay you.
[18:30]But he would not; but went and cast him into prison till he
should pay the debt. [18:31]Then his fellow-servants seeing what was
done, were greatly displeased, and went and related to their lord all
things that were done. [18:32]Then his lord called him, and said to
him, Evil servant; I forgave you all that debt because you besought me
[to do it]. [18:33]Ought you not also to pity your fellow-servant, as I
pitied you? [18:34]And his lord was displeased, and delivered him to
the tormentors till he should pay all the debt. [18:35]So also will my
heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not each one his brother from
your hearts.




