FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY. CHAPTER I. A CHARGE TO TIMOTHY CONCERNING THE GOSPEL, PUBLIC PRAYER, AND THE DUTIES OF WOMEN.


PHILIPPI, A.D. 65. 

1 [1:1]PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our
Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope, [1:2]to Timothy my true son in the
faith; grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father and Christ Jesus our
Lord.

2 [1:3]As I requested you to remain at Ephesus, when going into
Macedonia, that you might charge some not to preach another doctrine,
[1:4]nor attend to myths or interminable genealogies, which occasion
disputes rather than a dispensation of God by faith, [do.] [1:5]But the
end of the commandment is love from a pure heart and good conscience
and faith unfeigned, [1:6]which some having missed turned aside to vain
words, [1:7]desiring to be teachers of the law, not understanding what
they say nor about what they make confident assertions. [1:8] But we
know that the law is good if one uses it lawfully; [1:9]knowing this,
that a law is not made for a righteous man, but for the wicked and
disorderly, the impious and sinful, the unholy and profane, murderers
of fathers and murderers of mothers and murderers of their fellow-men,
[1:10]fornicators, sodomites, men-stealers, liars, perjurers, and
whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine, [1:11]according to the
glorious gospel of the blessed God, with which I have been intrusted.
[1:12]And I thank our Lord Jesus Christ who has empowered me [to
preach,] that he accounted me faithful, putting me in the ministry,
[1:13]who formerly was a blasphemer and persecutor and an injurious
man; but I obtained mercy because I did those things ignorantly in
unbelief; [1:14]and the grace of our Lord greatly abounded with the
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. [1:15]The word is true and
worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief; [1:16]but on this account I obtained
mercy, that Jesus Christ might exhibit in me first all long-suffering,
for an example to those who should hereafter believe in him to life
eternal. [1:17]And to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
God, be honor and glory forever and ever; amen.

3 [1:18]This charge I commit to you, son Timothy, according to the
prophecies which went before concerning you, that by them you may
perform an honorable service, [1:19]having faith and a good conscience,
which some having cast away have suffered shipwreck of the faith;
[1:20]of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I delivered to Satan,
that they may learn not to blaspheme.

4 [2:1]I exhort therefore, first of all, that petitions, prayers,
intercessions, thanksgivings should be offered for all men, [2:2]for
kings and all in authority, that we may lead quiet and peaceful lives
in all piety and sanctity. [2:3]For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Saviour, [2:4]who wishes all men to be saved and to
come to a knowledge of truth. [2:5] For there is one God, and one
mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus, [2:6]who gave himself a
ransom for all, a testimony for its own times, [2:7]of which I was made
a herald and an apostle,--I speak the truth, I lie not,--a teacher of
nations in faith and truth.

5 [2:8]I wish also that men should pray everywhere, lifting up holy
hands, without wrath and disputations; [2:9]and in like manner also,
that women in becoming apparel with modesty and sobriety adorn
themselves, not with plaited hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly
clothing, [2:10]but with good works, which become women professing
godliness. [2:11]Let a woman learn quietly in all subjection; [2:12]but
I permit not a woman to teach, nor to have authority over a man, but to
be quiet.  [2:13]For Adam was first formed, then Eve. [2:14]And Adam
was not deceived; but the woman being deceived fell into transgression;
[2:15]but she shall be saved through child-bearing, if they continue in
faith, and love, and holiness, with sobriety.




