CHAPTER II. THE APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS, THE DOCTRINES OF THE GOSPEL, WIDOWS, ELDERS, SERVANTS, ETC.


1 [3:1]IT is a true saying, If any one desires an episcopate he desires
a good work. [3:2]It is necessary therefore that a bishop should be
blameless, a husband of one wife, circumspect, sober, well-behaved,
hospitable, apt to teach, [3:3]not a wine-drinker, not a quarrelsome
man, but gentle, not contentious, not avaricious, [3:4]ruling well his
own house, having his children in subjection with all dignity,--
[3:5]but if any one knows not how to rule his own house, how will he
take care of the church of God?-- [3:6]not a novice, lest being
inflated with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil. [3:7]
And he must also have a good name from those without, that he may not
fall into reproach and a snare of the devil.

2 [3:8]The deacons in like manner ought to be grave, not
double-tongued, not given to much wine, not devoted to base gain,
[3:9]having the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.  [3:10]And
let these be proved first, then let them serve, being found blameless.
[3:11]The women in like manner must be grave, not slanderers,
circumspect, faithful in all things. [3:12]Let the deacons be husbands
of one wife, ruling well their children and their own houses. [3:13]
For they who exercise the deaconship well, procure for themselves an
honorable standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

3 [3:14]These things I write to you, hoping to come to you shortly;
[3:15]but if I delay, that you may know how you ought to conduct
yourself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God,
the pillar and foundation of the truth. [3:16]And confessedly great is
the mystery of piety; [Christ,] who was manifested in the flesh, was
justified in the spirit, was seen by angels, was preached to the
nations, was believed on in the world, was received up into glory.

4 [4:1]But the Spirit says expressly, that in the last times some shall
apostatize from the faith, attending to lying spirits and doctrines of
demons, [4:2][misled] by the hypocrisy of false teachers, whose
consciences are cauterized, [4:3]who forbid to marry, [command] to
abstain from meat, which God created to be received with thanksgiving
by the faithful and those who know the truth. [4:4]For every creature
of God is good, and nothing to be rejected, [but] to be received with
thanksgiving; [4:5]for it is sanctified through the word of God and
prayer.

5 [4:6]Suggesting these things to the brothers, you will be a good
minister of Christ Jesus, nourished with the words of the faith and the
good instruction which you have followed; [4:7]but avoid profane and
silly myths; exercise yourself in piety; [4:8]for bodily exercise
profits little; but piety is profitable in all things, having a promise
of the present life and of the life to come. [4:9]It is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptation. [4:10] For to this end we also
labor and suffer reproach, because we hope in the living God, who is
the Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful.

6 [4:11]These things command and teach. [4:12]Let no one despise your
youth, but be an example to the faithful, in word, in conduct, in love,
in faith, in purity. [4:13]Till I come attend to reading, exhortation,
teaching. [4:14] Neglect not the gift which is in you, which was given
you by prophecy, with the imposition of hands of the eldership.
[4:15]Study these things, be much in them, that your improvement may be
manifest to all.  [4:16]Attend to yourself, and to teaching; continue
in it, for doing this you will both save yourself and those that hear
you.

7 [5:1]Rebuke not an aged man, but entreat him as a father, the younger
men as brothers, [5:2]the aged women as mothers, the younger as
sisters, with all purity. [5:3]Support the widows who are widows
indeed. [5:4]But if any widow has children or relatives, let them learn
first to support their family and to make returns to their parents, for
this is acceptable in the sight of God. [5:5] But one that is a widow
indeed and alone hopes in God, and continues in petitions and prayers
night and day; [5:6]but a woman that lives voluptuously is dead while
she lives. [5:7]And command these things, that they be blameless.
[5:8]And if any one provides not for his own, and especially for those
of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an
unbeliever.

8 [5:9]Let not a widow be enrolled under sixty years of age, a wife of
one husband, [5:10]well reputed for good works, if she has brought up
children, if she has exercised hospitality, if she has washed the
saints' feet, if she has relieved the distressed, if she has pursued
every good work. [5:11]But reject the younger widows; for when they
fall into pleasure to the neglect of Christ, they wish to marry,
[5:12]being condemned because they have rejected the first faith;
[5:13]and at the same time also, being idle, they learn to go from
house to house, and not only are they idle, they are also tattlers and
mischief makers, saying what they ought not. [5:14]I wish therefore the
younger women to marry, bear children, keep house, give no occasion of
reproach to the enemy; [5:15]for some have already turned back after
Satan.  [5:16]If any faithful man or faithful woman has widows, let
them give them relief, and let not the church be burdened, that it may
be able to relieve those really widows.

9 [5:17]Let the elders who rule well be accounted worthy of a double
compensation, especially those who labor in word and teaching.
[5:18]For the Scripture says, You shall not muzzle the ox that
threshes; and, The laborer is worthy of his reward.  [5:19]Against an
elder receive not an accusation, except by two or three witnesses.
[5:20]Those that sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

10 [5:21]I charge you before God, and Jesus Christ, and the elect
angels, that you keep these things without prejudice, doing nothing
from partiality. [5:22] Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither partake
of others' sins. Keep yourself pure. [5:23]Drink no longer water, but
use a little wine on account of your stomach and your frequent
infirmities. [5:24]The sins of some men are manifest, going before to
judgment; but some they follow; [5:25]in like manner also good works
are manifest, and those which are otherwise cannot be hid.

11 [6:1]Let as many servants as are under the yoke account their
masters worthy of all honor, that the name and doctrine of God may not
be blasphemed. [6:2]And let those who have believing masters not
despise them, because they are brothers, but rather serve, because they
are believers and beloved, who partake of the benefit.

12 These things teach and exhort. [6:3]If any one teaches differently,
and consents not to sound words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the doctrine which is according to piety, [6:4]he is blinded and
knows nothing, but has a sickly longing for debates and wars of words,
from which arise envy, contention, blasphemies, evil suspicions,
[6:5]and wranglings of men of unsound judgments and destitute of the
truth, supposing that piety is gain. [6:6]But piety with contentment is
great gain.  [6:7]For we brought nothing into the world; it is clear
that we can carry nothing out of it; [6:8]but having food and clothing
let us be contented with them. [6:9]But those who wish to be rich fall
into trial and a snare, and many foolish and injurious desires, which
plunge men into destruction and perdition.  [6:10]For the love of money
is a root of all evils, which some having desired have been misled from
the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

13 [6:11]But do you, O man of God, avoid these things; but pursue
righteousness, piety, faith, love, patience, meekness.  [6:12]Fight the
good fight of the faith, lay hold on eternal life, to which you were
called and made the good profession before many witnesses. [6:13]I
charge you before the God who gives life to all [creatures], and Christ
Jesus who made the good profession before Pontius Pilate, [6:14]that
you keep the charge without spot, without blame, till the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ, [6:15]which the blessed and only Potentate will
show in its times, the King of kings and Lord of Lords, [6:16]who only
has immortality, dwelling in light unapproachable, whom no man has seen
nor can see; to whom be honor and power eternal; amen.

14 [6:17]Charge the rich in the present life not to be high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us all
things richly to enjoy, [6:18]to perform good works, to be rich in good
works, to be liberal, benevolent, [6:19]treasuring up for themselves a
good foundation for the future, that they may lay hold on the true life.

15 [6:20]O Timothy, keep the trust, turning away from profane and empty
words, and contradictions of mis-named science, [6:21]which some having
professed have erred from the faith. The grace be with you.





