SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY. ROME, A.D. 65. CHAPTER I. INFORMATION, ADMONITION, ETC.


1 [1:1]PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according
to the promise of life in Christ Jesus, [1:2]to Timothy my beloved son.
Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

2 [1:3]I thank God, whom I serve from my ancestors with a pure
conscience, that I mention you incessantly in my prayers night and day,
[1:4]desiring to see you, remembering your tears, that I might be
filled with joy, [1:5]having a remembrance of the unfeigned faith in
you, which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois, and your mother
Eunice, and I am persuaded that [it dwells] also in you. [1:6]For which
cause I admonish you to stir up the gift of God which is in you through
the imposition of my hands.  [1:7]For God gave us not a spirit of fear,
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.

3 [1:8]Be not ashamed therefore of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me
his prisoner, but endure affliction with us in the gospel according to
the power of God, [1:9]who saved us, and called us with a holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace
given us in Christ Jesus from eternity, [1:10]but made known now
through the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who destroyed death,
and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, [1:11]of
which I was made a herald, and an apostle, and a teacher of the
nations; [1:12]for which cause I suffer these things; but I am not
ashamed; for I know in whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he
is able to keep my trust to that day.

4 [1:13]Retain the form of sound words which you heard from me in faith
and the love in Christ Jesus. [1:14]Guard the good trust, through the
Holy Spirit which dwells in us. [1:15]You know this, that all those in
Asia left me, of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes. [1:16]May the Lord
show mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and
was not ashamed of my chains, [1:17] but being at Rome he sought most
diligently, and found me. [1:18]The Lord grant him to find mercy with
the Lord in that day. And what services he performed at Ephesus, you
know very well.

5 [2:1]Do you therefore, my son, be strong in the grace in Christ
Jesus, [2:2] and what you heard from me through many witnesses, these
things commit to faithful men, who shall be competent to teach others
also. [2:3]Endure evil as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. [2:4]No one
who serves as a soldier is involved in the business of life, that he
may please him who has employed him as a soldier. [2:5]And if a man
contends as an athlete, he is not crowned unless he contends lawfully.
[2:6]The husbandman who labors must first partake of the fruits of the
earth.  [2:7]Consider what I say; for the Lord shall give you
understanding in all things.

6 [2:8]Remember Jesus Christ raised from the dead, a descendant of
David, according to my gospel, [2:9]in which I suffer even to chains as
an evil doer; but the word of God is not bound.  [2:10]Therefore I
endure all things for the elect, that they may obtain the salvation in
Christ Jesus with eternal glory.  [2:11]The saying is true, For if we
died together we shall live together; [2:12]if we endure patiently we
shall reign together; if we deny him he will deny us; [2:13]if we
believe not he continues faithful; for he cannot deny himself.

7 [2:14]Call to mind these things, charging [men] before the Lord not
to debate about words, to no profit, to the subversion of the hearers.
[2:15]Be diligent to present yourself approved to God, a workman that
will not be put to shame, rightly dividing the word of truth. [2:16]But
profane and vain words, avoid; for they greatly increase impiety,
[2:17]and their word will eat like a gangrene; of whom are Hymenaeus
and Philetus, [2:18]who have erred from the truth, saying that the
resurrection has passed already, and overturn the faith of some.
[2:19]But the foundation of God stands firm, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his; and, Let every one who names the name of the
Lord depart from wickedness. [2:20]But in a great house there are not
only vessels of gold and silver, but those also of wood and clay, and
some for honor and some for dishonor; [2:21]if therefore any one
purifies himself from these [errors], he shall be a vessel for honor,
sanctified, of good use to the master, prepared for every good work.

8 [2:22]But avoid youthful desires, and pursue righteousness, faith,
love, peace, with those who call on the Lord from a pure heart.
[2:23]But foolish and trifling disputes avoid, knowing that they
produce contentions; [2:24]and the servant of the Lord must not
contend, but must be gentle to all, apt to teach, patient under evil,
[2:25]in meekness correcting the adversaries, that God may give them a
change of mind to a knowledge of the truth, [2:26]and that they may
recover themselves from the snare of the devil, who are made captives
by him to his will.




