CHAPTER II. THE LAST TIME, HIS APPROACHING MARTYRDOM, ETC.


1 [3:1]AND know this, that in the last days perilous times shall come.
[3:2] Men will be selfish, avaricious, vain, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, [3:3]without natural
affection, covenant breakers, slanderers, intemperate, ungentle,
despisers of the good, [3:4]traitors, rash, boasters, lovers of
pleasure more than lovers of God, [3:5]having a form of piety but
denying its power; and these avoid. [3:6]Of these are those who go into
the houses and take captive foolish women loaded with sins, and led by
various desires, [3:7]always learning and never able to come to a
knowledge of the truth. [3:8]As Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so
also these oppose the truth, men of no judgment, reprobate in respect
to the faith. [3:9]But they shall proceed no further; for their
foolishness shall become manifest to all, as theirs also was. [3:10]But
you have followed my instruction,--mode of life, purpose, faith,
long-suffering, love, patience, [3:11]persecutions, sufferings, which
befell me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; the great persecutions
which I suffered, and the Lord delivered me from all. [3:12]And all who
will live piously in Christ Jesus shall be persecuted. [3:13]But evil
men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived. [3:14]But do you continue in what you learned and understood,
knowing from whom you learned, [3:15]and that from a child you have
known the sacred Scriptures, which can make you wise to salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus. [3:16]All Scripture is divinely inspired
and is profitable for instruction, for conviction, for correction, for
education in righteousness, [3:17]that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly fitted for every good work.

2 [4:1]I earnestly charge you before God and Christ Jesus who is about
to judge the living and dead, and [by] his appearing and his kingdom,
[4:2]preach the word, press it in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and instruction; [4:3]for the
time will come when they will not endure sound instruction, but will
accumulate for themselves teachers according to their desires, pleasing
their ear, [4:4]and they will turn away their ears from the truth, and
be turned to myths. [4:5]But do you be sober in all things, endure
evil, do the work of an evangelist, perform fully your ministry. [4:6]
For I am already being offered, and the time of my departure has come.
[4:7]I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have
kept the faith; [4:8]henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge will give me in that
day, and not me only but all who love his appearing.

3 [4:9]Make haste to come to me quickly; [4:10]for Demas forsook me
having loved the present life and went to Thessalonica, Cresces to
Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia; [4:11]Luke only is with me. Take Mark and
bring him with you; for [he will be] useful to me for service.
[4:12]But I sent Tychicus to Ephesus. [4:13] The cloak which I left at
Troas with Carpus, when you come, bring, and the books, especially the
parchments.

4 [4:14]Alexander the coppersmith did me much harm; may the Lord reward
him according to his work. [4:15]And do you beware of him, for he
greatly opposed our words. [4:16]At my first defense no one stood by
me, but all forsook me; may it not be set to their account; [4:17]but
the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, that the word should be
fully declared by me, and all the nations should hear, and I was
delivered from the mouth of the lion.  [4:18]The Lord will deliver me
from every evil work, and bring me safe to his heavenly kingdom; to
whom be the glory forever and ever; amen.

5 [4:19]Salute Prisca [Priscilla] and Aquila and the house of
Onesiphorus. [4:20]Erastus remained at Corinth, and Trophimus I left
sick at Miletus. [4:21] Make haste to come before winter.  Eubulus and
Pudens and Linus and Claudia, and all the brothers, salute you.
[4:22]The Lord be with your spirit. The grace be with you.





