THE CATHOLIC EPISTLES. THE EPISTLE OF JAMES. CHAPTER I. TRIALS, PRAYER, FAITH AND WORKS.


JERUSALEM, A.D. 61-66.

1 [1:1]JAMES, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the
twelve tribes in the dispersion, greeting. [1:2]Account it all joy, my
brothers, when you fall into various trials, [1:3]knowing that the
trial of your faith produces patience.  [1:4]But let patience have a
perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire, lacking in nothing.
[1:5]And if any one of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives
to all liberally and upbraids not, and it shall be given him. [1:6]But
let him ask in faith, not doubting; for he that doubts is like a wave
of the sea, driven with the wind and agitated. [1:7]For let not that
man think that he shall receive any thing from the Lord, [1:8]a
double-minded man, unstable in all his ways. [1:9]But let the brother
that is humble rejoice in his exaltation, [1:10]and the rich in his
humiliation, for he shall pass away like a flower of the grass.
[1:11]For the sun rose hot, and withered the grass, and its flower fell
off, and the beauty of its appearance perished; so also shall the rich
man perish in his ways.

2 [1:12]Blessed is the man who endures trial, for when proved he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord promised to those who love
him. [1:13]Let no tempted one say, I am tempted by God; for God is not
subject to temptation by evils, and he tempts no one. [1:14]But every
one is tempted when he is drawn away by his desires, and enticed;
[1:15]then the desire taking effect produces sin, and sin being
finished brings forth death.

3 [1:16]Be not deceived, my beloved brothers. [1:17]All good giving,
and every perfect gift, comes down from above, from the Father of
lights, with whom there is no change or shadow of turning. [1:18]Of his
own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of
first fruit of his creatures.

4 [1:19]Understand, my beloved brothers, and let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, slow to anger; [1:20]for man's anger performs not
God's righteousness. [1:21]Wherefore, laying aside all filthiness and
abounding vice, receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able
to save your souls. [1:22]But be doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving yourselves.  [1:23]For if any one is a hearer of the
word and not a doer, he is like a man perceiving his natural face in a
glass; [1:24]for he perceived himself, and went away, and immediately
forgot what kind of a man he was. [1:25]But he that looks into the
perfect law of liberty and continues in it, not being a forgetful
hearer but a doer of work, he shall be blessed in his doing. [1:26]But
if any one among you thinks he is religious, and bridles not his
tongue, but deceives his mind, that man's religion is vain.  [1:27]Pure
religion and undefiled with the God and Father is this, to visit the
orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep one's self
unspotted from the world.

5 [2:1]My brothers, have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus
Christ with a respect of persons. [2:2]For if there comes into your
assembly a man with a gold ring, in splendid clothing, and there also
comes in a poor man in vile clothing, [2:3]and you look upon him who
wears the splendid clothing, and say to him, Sit here in a good place,
and say to the poor man, Stand there, or sit under my footstool,
[2:4]are you not condemned in yourselves and judges of evil thoughts?

6 [2:5]Hear, my beloved brothers. Has not God chosen the poor of the
world rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to those
who love him? [2:6] But you dishonor the poor.  Do not the rich oppress
you and drag you to tribunals? [2:7]And do they not blaspheme the good
name by which you are called?  [2:8]If you keep indeed the royal law
according to the Scripture, You shall love your neighbor as yourself,
you do well; [2:9]but if you respect persons, you commit sin, convicted
by the law as transgressors. [2:10]For whoever shall keep the whole
law, and offend in one point, is guilty of all. [2:11]For he that said,
You shall not commit adultery, said also, You shall not kill; and if
you do not commit adultery, but kill, you are a transgressor of the
law. [2:12]So speak and so do, as being about to be judged by the law
of liberty. [2:13]For he shall have judgment without mercy who shows
not mercy; mercy rejoices over judgment.

7 [2:14]What is the profit, my brothers, if a man says he has faith,
but has not works? Can faith save him? [2:15]And if a brother or sister
is naked, or destitute of daily food, [2:16]and one of you says to
them, Go in peace, be warmed and be filled, but gives them not the
necessary supplies for the body, what is the profit? [2:17]So also
faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone. [2:18]But some one
will say, You have faith, and I have works; show me your faith without
works, and I will show you my faith by works. [2:19]You believe that
there is one God? You do well; demons also believe and tremble.
[2:20]But will you know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?
[2:21] Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he offered
up Isaac his son on the altar? [2:22]You see that faith cooperated with
his works, and by works was faith made perfect, [2:23]and the Scripture
was fulfilled which says, And Abraham believed God and it was accounted
to him a righteousness, and he was called God's friend. [2:24]You see
then that a man is justified by works and not by faith only. [2:25]And
in like manner also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when
she received the messengers and sent them out another way? [2:26]For as
the body without a spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.




