CHAPTER II. ON CENSORIOUSNESS, WISDOM, CONTENTION, ETC.


1 [3:1]BE not many of you teachers, my brothers, knowing that we shall
receive a severer judgment. [3:2]For in many things we all offend; if
one offends not in word he is a perfect man, able to keep in subjection
also the whole body. [3:3]But we put bits into the mouths of horses
that they may obey us, and direct their whole body; [3:4]behold also
the ships, though of so great size and driven by powerful winds, are
directed by a very small helm wherever the will of the pilot chooses;
[3:5]so also the tongue is a small member and boasts of great things.
Behold, how much wood a little fire kindles! [3:6]And the tongue is a
fire, the tongue is made a world of wickedness among our members, it
defiles the whole body and sets on fire the course of nature and is set
on fire by hell. [3:7]For every kind of beasts, and birds, and
reptiles, and fishes, is tamed and has been tamed by the human race,
[3:8]but the tongue can no man tame; it is a disorderly evil, full of a
deadly poison. [3:9]With it bless we the Lord and Father, and with it
curse we men made in the likeness of God. [3:10]Out of the same mouth
proceeds a blessing and a curse. My brothers, these things ought not so
to be.  [3:11]Does a fountain send forth sweet water and bitter from
the same opening? [3:12]Can a fig tree, my brothers, produce olives, or
a vine, figs? So you cannot make salt water sweet.

2 [3:13]What wise and intelligent man is there among you? Let him show
his works by good conduct, in the meekness of wisdom.  [3:14]But if you
have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, boast not and lie not
against the truth. [3:15]This wisdom comes not from above, but is
earthly, natural, demoniacal. [3:16]For where envy and strife are,
there are disorder and every evil work. [3:17]But the wisdom from above
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be persuaded, full of
mercy and of good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy.
[3:18]And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace to those who make
peace.

3 [4:1]Whence come wars and contentions among you? Come they not
thence, from your pleasures that war in your members? [4:2]You desire
and have not; you kill, and envy, and cannot obtain; you fight and
carry on war. You have not, because you do not ask; [4:3]you ask and do
not receive, because you ask amiss, to expend on your pleasures.
[4:4]Adulteresses, know you not that the friendship of the world is
enmity against God? Whoever therefore wishes to be a friend of the
world, is made an enemy of God.  [4:5]Or do you suppose that the
Scripture says in vain, The spirit which dwells in us desires to envy?
[4:6]But he gives more grace; wherefore he says, God resists the proud,
but gives grace to the humble. [4:7]Be subject therefore to God; resist
the devil and he will flee from you; [4:8]draw nigh to God and he will
draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, sinners, purify your hearts,
double-minded. [4:9]Lament, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into sorrow.  [4:10]Humble
yourselves before the Lord and he will exalt you.

4 [4:11]Speak not one against one another, brothers. He that speaks
against a brother or judges his brother, speaks against the law and
judges the law. But if you judge the law you are not a doer of the law,
but a judge. [4:12]There is one law-giver and judge, who is able to
save and to destroy; but who are you that judge a neighbor?

5 [4:13]Come now, you that say, To-day and to-morrow we will go to such
a city and engage in business there a year, and trade and make profits,
[4:14]who know not what will be on the morrow; for what is your life?
You are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes away;
[4:15]for you ought to say, If the Lord wills, we shall both live and
do this or that. [4:16]But now you glory in your boasting; all such
glorying is evil. [4:17]He therefore that knows how to do good and does
it not, to him it is sin.

6 [5:1]Come now, rich men, weep and lament for the miseries which are
coming upon you. [5:2]Your riches have decayed, and your garments are
moth-eaten, [5:3]your gold and silver are destroyed with rust, and
their rust will be a witness against you, and consume your flesh like
fire. You have laid up treasures for the last days. [5:4]Behold, the
wages of the laborers who harvested your fields, kept back by you, cry,
and the loud calls of the reapers have entered into the ears of the
Lord of sabaoth.  [5:5]You have lived in luxury on the earth and in
pleasure, you have nourished your hearts in a day of slaughter.
[5:6]You have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist you.

7 [5:7]Wait patiently therefore, brothers, till the coming of the Lord.
Behold, the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and
is of long patience, till he receives the autumnal and vernal rain.
[5:8]Do you also have long patience, confirm your hearts, for the
coming of the Lord is at hand. [5:9] Complain not, brothers, against
one another, that you be not judged; behold, the judge stands before
the doors. [5:10]You have the prophets who spoke in the name of the
Lord, my brothers, as an example of patience and long-suffering.
[5:11]Behold, we account them blessed who are patient. You have heard
of the patience of Job, and you know the purpose of the Lord, that he
is very merciful and compassionate.

8 [5:12]Above all things, my brothers, swear not, neither by heaven,
nor the earth, nor any other oath. But let your yes be yes, and your
no, no, that you may not fall under condemnation.

9 [5:13]If any one among you is afflicted, let him pray; if any one is
happy, let him sing psalms; [5:14]if any one is sick among you, let him
send for the elders of the church, and let them pray for him, anointing
him with oil in the name of the Lord.  [5:15]And the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up; and if he has
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. [5:16]Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another, that you may be cured, for
the prayer of the righteous operates with great power. [5:17]Elijah was
a man of like passions with us, and he prayed that it might not rain,
and it rained not on the land for three years and six months; [5:18]
and again he prayed, and heaven gave rain, and the earth yielded her
fruit.

10 [5:19]Brothers, if any one among you errs from the truth, and one
converts him, [5:20]let him know that he who converts a sinner from an
error of [his] way, shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude
of sins.





