FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER. CHAPTER I. A FIRM ADHERENCE TO CHRIST, ETC.


BABYLON, A.D. 64.

1 [1:1]PETER, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the elect strangers of the
dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,
[1:2]according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by
sanctification of the Spirit, to obedience and the sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ. Grace and peace be multiplied to you.

2 [1:3]Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in
his great mercy has begotten us to a living hope through the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, [1:4]to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled and unfading, kept in heaven for you
[1:5]who are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation ready
to be revealed in the last time. [1:6]In which you rejoice, though now
for a little while if need be made sad by manifold trials, [1:7]that
the trial of your faith, which is much more precious than gold that is
destroyed but proved by fire, may be found to praise and glory and
honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ, [1:8]whom not having seen you
love, in whom believing though now you see him not you rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious, [1:9] receiving the end of the faith, the
salvation of souls. [1:10]Concerning which salvation the prophets also
who prophesied concerning the grace [bestowed] on us inquired
diligently and sought, [1:11]inquiring as to what person or what time
the Spirit of Christ which was in them signified, when it declared
before the sufferings of Christ and after these the glories, [1:12]to
whom it was revealed that they ministered not to themselves but to us
those things which have now been declared to you by those who preached
to you the good news, with the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, into which
the angels desire to look.

3 [1:13]Wherefore, girding up the loins of your minds, be sober, and
hope to the end for the gift to be brought to you by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. [1:14]As obedient children, not conforming yourselves to
the desires of your former ignorance, [1:15]but as he that called you
is holy be you also holy in all [your] conduct, [1:16]because it is
written, Be you holy, for I am holy. [1:17]And if you call on the
Father, who without respect of persons judges according to each one's
work, spend the time of your life with fear, [1:18] knowing that you
were not redeemed from your vain mode of life received by tradition
from your fathers, with destructible things, silver or gold, [1:19] but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and
without a spot; [1:20]who was foreknown before the foundation of the
world, but made manifest in these last times for you, [1:21]who through
him believed in God, who raised him from the dead and gave him glory,
so that your faith and hope may be in God.

4 [1:22]Having purified your souls by obeying the truth to unfeigned
brotherly love, love one another fervently, from the heart,
[1:23]having been born again, not from destructible seed but from
indestructible, through the word of God which lives and endures.
[1:24]For all flesh is like grass, and all its glory like the flower of
the grass; the grass has withered, and its flower fell off; [1:25]but
the word of the Lord continues forever. And this is the word preached
to you.

5 [2:1]Laying aside therefore all malice and all deceit and hypocrisies
and envies and all evil speakings, [2:2]as new born babes desire
earnestly the pure milk of the word, that you may grow by it to
salvation, [2:3]if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is good.
[2:4]To whom coming, a living stone, rejected indeed by men but
approved by God, elect, precious, [2:5]do you also yourselves be built
up living stones, a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer
spiritual sacrifices well pleasing to God through Jesus Christ,
[2:6]for it is said in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Zion a chief
corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
ashamed. [2:7]To you therefore who believe he is precious; but to the
disobedient, the stone which the builders rejected has become the head
of a corner [2:8]and a stone of stumbling and rock of offense, who
stumble at the word, being disobedient, to which also they were
appointed.  [2:9]But you are an elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation, a peculiar people, that you should declare the virtues of him
who called you out of darkness into his glorious light; [2:10] who
formerly were not a people, but now are a people of God, who had not
obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.




