CHAPTER II. PERSONAL, POLITICAL, AND SOCIAL DUTIES, ETC.


1 [2:11]BELOVED, I exhort you as strangers and foreigners, abstain from
carnal desires, which war against the soul, [2:12]having your conduct
honorable among the gentiles, that wherein they speak against you as
evil-doers, from the good works which they see they may glorify God in
the day of visitation.

2 [2:13]Be subject therefore to every human government, for the Lord's
sake, whether to the king, as superior, [2:14]to governors, sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers and the praise of those who do well;
[2:15]for this is the will of God, that by well-doing you may silence
the ignorance of foolish men; [2:16]as free, and not using freedom for
a cloak of vice, but as servants of God. [2:17]Honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear God, honor the king.

3 [2:18]Let servants be subject with all fear to masters, not only to
the good and gentle but also to the perverse. [2:19]For this deserves
thanks, if on account of a knowledge of God one endures pain, suffering
unjustly. [2:20]For what glory is it if when you sin and are punished
you bear it patiently? But if you do well and suffer and bear it
patiently, [this deserves thanks], for it is acceptable to God.
[2:21]For to this you were called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving you a copy that you should follow his steps, [2:22]who
committed no sin, neither was deceit found in his mouth, [2:23]who
being reviled reviled not, suffering threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, [2:24]who himself bore our sins
in his body on the cross, that we having died to sins, may live to
righteousness; by whose stripes you were healed. [2:25]For you were
like lost sheep, but are now returned to the shepherd and bishop of
your souls.

4 [3:1]In like manner let the women be subject to their husbands, that
even if some disobey the word, they may be gained through the conduct
of their wives without the word, [3:2]seeing your pure mode of life in
the fear [of God]. [3:3]Whose ornament let it not be the external
[ornament] of braided hair and the putting on of chains of gold or of
clothing, [3:4]but let the hidden man of the heart be adorned with the
imperishable [ornaments] of a meek and quiet spirit, which are of great
price before God.  [3:5]For so formerly also the holy women who hoped
in God adorned themselves, being subject to their husbands, [3:6]as
Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose children you are, doing
good and having no fear. [3:7]In like manner let the husbands [do],
living together in knowledge with the wife as with a vessel of less
strength, deeming them precious, co-heirs of the grace of life, that
your prayers may not be hindered.

5 [3:8]Finally, be all of one mind, sympathising, loving as brothers,
compassionate, humble, [3:9]not returning evil for evil or railing for
railing, but on the contrary blessing [your enemies], because to this
you are called, that you may inherit blessing. [3:10]For he that will
love life and see good days, let him withhold his tongue from evil and
his lips from speaking deceit, [3:11]let him abstain from evil and do
good, let him seek peace and pursue it, [3:12]for the eyes of the Lord
are on the righteous and his ears attend to their prayer, but the face
of the Lord is against them that do evil.

6 [3:13]And who is he that will injure you if you are followers of what
is good? [3:14]But even if you suffer on account of righteousness, you
are blessed. But fear not with their fear, neither be troubled;
[3:15]and sanctify the anointed Lord in your hearts, and be always
ready with a defense to every one that asks you a reason for the hope
that is in you; but with meekness and fear, [3:16]having a good
conscience, that in what they speak evil of you they may be ashamed who
slander your good conduct in Christ. [3:17]For it is better to suffer
doing good, if the will of God allows, than doing evil. [3:18]For
Christ also suffered once for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might lead us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive in
the spirit, [3:19] in which also he went and preached to the spirits in
prison, [3:20]who were formerly disobedient when the long suffering of
God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was being prepared, in
which a few, that is eight souls, were saved by water. [3:21]The
archetype of which, baptism, also now saves us, not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience in God,
through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, [3:22]who is on the right
hand of God, having gone to heaven, angels and authorities and powers
being made subject to him.

7 [4:1]Christ therefore having suffered for us in the flesh, arm
yourselves also with the same mind, for he that has suffered in the
flesh has ceased from sin, [4:2]that you may no longer live the rest of
your time in the flesh according to the desires of men, but according
to the will of God. [4:3]For the time past is sufficient for us to have
performed the will of the gentiles, walking in lewdness, inordinate
desires, drunkenness, revellings, drinkings and unlawful idolatries,
[4:4]in which they think it strange that you run not with them to the
same excessive intemperance, blaspheming, [4:5]who shall give an
account to him that is ready to judge the living and dead. [4:6]And for
this cause was the gospel preached also to the dead, that they might be
judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the
Spirit.

8 [4:7]But the end of all things is at hand. Be sober therefore, and
watch in prayers; [4:8]above all things have fervent love one for
another, for love hides a multitude of sins. [4:9]Be hospitable one to
another, without complaining; [4:10]as each has received a gift,
minister the same among yourselves as good stewards of the manifold
grace of God. [4:11]If any one speaks, let him speak as the oracles of
God, if any one serves, let it be as of the strength which God
supplies, that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ,
whose is the glory and the power for ever and ever; amen.




