CHAPTER III. TRIALS, ADMONITIONS TO PRESBYTERS, ETC.


1 [4:12]BELOVED, think not strange of the fiery trial which is to try
you, as if some strange thing happened to you, [4:13]but as you partake
of the sufferings of Christ rejoice, that you may also rejoice exulting
at the revelation of his glory. [4:14]If you are reproached for the
name of Christ, happy are you, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests
on you. [4:15]But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or
an evil doer, or as a meddler in other men's affairs; [4:16]but as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, let him glorify God on this account.
[4:17]For it is time for judgment to begin at the house of God; and if
it first begins with us, what will the end be of those that obey not
the gospel of God? [4:18]And if the righteous man is scarcely saved,
where will the ungodly and the sinner appear? [4:19]Let those therefore
who suffer by the will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing
as a faithful creator.

2 [5:1]The elders among you I exhort, who am a co-elder and witness of
the sufferings of Christ, and a partaker of the glory to be revealed;
[5:2]feed the flock of God which is among you, not by constraint but
willingly, not for base gain but of a ready mind, [5:3]not as having a
lordship over God's inheritance but being examples to the flock;
[5:4]and when the chief shepherd shall appear, you shall receive an
unfading crown of glory.

3 [5:5]Let the younger in like manner be subject to the elder, and do
you all be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for
God resists the proud but gives grace to the humble. [5:6]Humble
yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time; [5:7]casting all your care upon him, for he cares for
you.

4 [5:8]Be sober, be watchful. Your adversary the devil goes about like
a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; [5:9]whom resist, firm in
the faith, knowing that the same sufferings are accomplished by your
brothers in the world. [5:10]And may the God of all grace, who called
you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, when you have suffered a
little while, himself make you perfect, confirm, strengthen, establish
you. [5:11]To him be the glory and the power for ever; amen.

5 [5:12]I have written to you in a few words by Silvanus [Silas], a
faithful brother as I suppose, exhorting you, and testifying that this
is the true grace of God in which you stand. [5:13]The co-elect
[church] at Babylon salutes you, and Mark my son.  [5:14]Salute one
another with a kiss of love. Peace be to you all in Christ.





