CHAPTER XVII. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF MARRIAGE, DIVORCE, ETC.


1 [19:1]AND when Jesus had finished these words he departed from
Galilee, and came into the bounds of Judea beyond the Jordan; [19:2]and
great multitudes followed him, and he cured them there.  [19:3]And the
Pharisees came to him to try him, and said, Is it lawful [for a man] to
put away his wife for every cause?  [19:4]And he answered and said,
Have you not read that the Creator at the beginning made them male and
female? [19:5]and he said, On this account shall a man leave his father
and mother, and be joined to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh.
[19:6]So that they are no longer two but one flesh. What therefore God
has yoked together, let not man separate.

2 [19:7]They said to him, Why then did Moses command us to give a bill
of divorcement, and put her away? [19:8]He said to them, Moses, on
account of your hardness of heart, allowed you to put away your wives;
but from the beginning it was not so. [19:9]And I tell you, that
whoever puts away his wife, except for adultery, and marries another,
commits adultery; and whoever marries her that is put away, commits
adultery.

3 [19:10]The disciples said to him, If the case of a man is thus with
his wife, it is not expedient to marry. [19:11]And he said to them, All
do not receive this word, but those to whom it is given. [19:12]For
there are eunuchs from birth, who were born so from their mother; and
there are eunuchs who are made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs
who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven.
He that is able to receive [this doctrine] let him receive it.

4 [19:13]Then little children were brought to him that he should put
his hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them.  [19:14]But
Jesus said, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.  [19:15]And he put his hands
on them and departed thence.

5 [19:16]And behold one came and said to him, Teacher, what good [work]
shall I do that I may have eternal life? [19:17]And he said to him, Why
do you ask me of the good? one is the good. But if you wish to enter
into life, keep the commandments. [19:18]He said to him, What? And
Jesus said, this; You shall not kill; You shall not commit adultery;
You shall not steal; You shall not testify falsely; [19:19]Honor your
father and mother; and you shall love your neighbor as yourself.
[19:20]The young man said to him, All these have I kept; what do I lack
yet? [19:21]Jesus said to him, If you will be perfect, go and sell your
property, and give to the poor, and you shall have a treasure in
heaven; and come and follow me. [19:22]And when the young man heard
[this] he went away sad, for he had great possessions.

6 [19:23]And Jesus said to his disciples, I tell you truly, that a rich
man will enter into the kingdom of heaven with difficulty.  [19:24]And
again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
[19:25]And the disciples hearing this, were greatly astonished, and
said, Who then can be saved? [19:26]But Jesus looking on them, said,
With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.

7 [19:27]Then Peter answered and said, Behold we have left all and
followed you; what shall we have therefore? [19:28]And Jesus said to
them, I tell you truly, that you who have followed me, in the
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory,
shall yourselves also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel; [19:29]and whoever has left brothers or sisters, or a father
or mother, or children, or lands or houses, for my name's sake, shall
receive many times as much, and inherit eternal life. [19:30]But many
first shall be last; and last, first.

8 [20:1]For the kingdom of heaven is like a householder who went out
early in the morning to hire laborers in his vineyard.  [20:2]And
agreeing with the laborers for a denarius [14 cents] a day, he sent
them into his vineyard. [20:3] And going out about the third hour, he
saw others standing idle in the market; [20:4]and he said to them, go
also into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you. And they
went. [20:5]Again going out about the sixth and ninth hours, he did
likewise.  [20:6]And going out about the eleventh hour he found others
standing, and said to them, Why stand you all the day idle?  [20:7]They
said to him, Because no man has hired us. He said to them, Go also into
the vineyard. [20:8]And when it was evening the lord of the vineyard
said to his steward, Call the laborers, and pay them the wages
[stipulated], beginning from the last even to the first. [20:9]And
those who came about the eleventh hour, received a denarius [14 cents]
each. [20:10]And those who came first supposed that they should receive
more. And they also received a denarius [14 cents] each; [20:11]and
when they had received it, they complained of the householder,
[20:12]saying, These last have worked but one hour, and you have made
them equal with us, who have borne the burden and heat of the day.
[20:13]But he answered and said to one of them, Neighbor, I do you no
wrong. Did you not agree with me for a denarius [14 cents]? [20:14]Take
what belongs to you, and go, for I will give to the last even as to
you. [20:15]Is it not right for me to do what I will with my own? Is
your eye evil because I am good?  [20:16]So the last shall be first,
and the first last.

9 [20:17]And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took his twelve disciples
aside privately, and said to them on the way, [20:18]Behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests
and scribes, and they will condemn him to death, [20:19]and deliver him
to the gentiles, to mock, and scourge, and crucify him; and on the
third day he shall be raised.

10 [20:20]Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her
sons, worshipping, and asking a certain thing of him.  [20:21]And he
said to her, What do you wish? She said to him, Say that these my two
sons shall sit, one on your right hand, and the other on your left, in
your kingdom. [20:22]But Jesus answered and said, You know not what you
ask. Can you drink of the cup of which I am about to drink? They said
to him, We can. [20:23]He said to them; you shall drink indeed of my
cup; but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give,
but to those for whom it is prepared by my Father. [20:24]And the ten
hearing this were displeased with the two brothers. [20:25]But Jesus
called them to him, and said, You know that the rulers of the gentiles
exercise lordship over them, and the great exercise authority over
them; but it shall not be so among you. [20:26]But whoever wishes to be
great among you, let him be your minister; [20:27]and whoever wishes to
be first among you, let him be your servant, [20:28]as the Son of man
came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for
many.




