CHAPTER II. THE COMING OF CHRIST, ETC.


1 [3:1]THIS second epistle, beloved, I now write to you, in which I
excite your pure minds by remembrance, [3:2]to remember the words
spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandment of us the
apostles of the Lord and Saviour, [3:3] knowing this first, that in the
last days scoffers shall come with scoffing walking after their
inordinate desires, [3:4]and saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the world.  [3:5]For of this they are
willingly ignorant, that the heavens were of old, and the earth was
made of water and by water by the word of God, [3:6]by which the world
that then was, being overflowed with water, was destroyed. [3:7]But the
present heavens and the earth have been preserved by his word, being
kept for fire, at the day of the judgment and destruction of wicked men.

2 [3:8]But let not this one thing escape you, beloved, that one day
with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
[3:9]The Lord is not slow in respect to his promise, as some men
account slowness, but is long-suffering toward us, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to a change of mind.

3 [3:10]But the day of the Lord will come as a thief, in which the
heavens shall pass away with a crash, and the elements be melted with
heat, and the earth and the works in it be consumed.  [3:11]All these
things therefore being dissolved, what persons ought we to be in holy
conduct and piety, [3:12] expecting and hastening the coming of the day
of God, in which the heavens being burnt up will be dissolved and the
elements be melted with heat. [3:13]But we, according to his promise,
look for a new heaven and a new earth, in which dwells righteousness.

4 [3:14]Wherefore, beloved, looking for these things, be diligent that
you may be found in him without a spot and blemish, in peace, [3:15]and
consider the long-suffering of the Lord our salvation; as also our
beloved brother Paul according to the wisdom given to him wrote to you,
[3:16]as also in all his epistles speaking of these things, in which
are some things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable
wrest as they also do the other Scriptures to their destruction.
[3:17]Do you therefore, beloved, knowing [these things] before, be on
your guard not to be carried away with the error of the wicked and fall
from your steadfastness, [3:18]but grow in grace and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and
forever.





