THE EPISTLE OF JUDAS


A.D. 67.

FALSE TEACHERS, ETC.

1 [1:1]JUDAS, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to the
beloved in God the Father, and the called who are kept by Jesus Christ.
[1:2]Mercy and peace and love be multiplied to you.

2 [1:3]Beloved, giving all diligence to write to you concerning the
common salvation, I was under a necessity to write and exhort you to
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints. [1:4]For
some men have come in by deception, who were of old appointed to this
judgment, impious, changing the grace of our God into lewdness, and
denying our only master and Lord, Jesus Christ.

3 [1:5]But I wish to remind you, though you once knew all, that the
Lord having saved his people from Egypt, afterwards destroyed those
that believed not, [1:6] and the angels who kept not their own
province, but left their habitation, he has kept under darkness in
eternal chains, for the judgment of the great day; [1:7]as Sodom and
Gomorrah and the cities about them, committing fornication in the same
manner as these and going after unnatural lewdness, are made an
example, enduring the punishment of eternal fire.

4 [1:8]In like manner also these dreamers defile the flesh, reject
government, and blaspheme glories. [1:9]But Michael the arch-angel,
when disputing with the devil he reasoned about the body of Moses,
dared not bring against him a charge of blasphemy, but said, The Lord
rebuke you. [1:10]But these blaspheme what they do not understand, and
what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in these things they corrupt
themselves. [1:11]Woe to them; for they have gone in the way of Cain,
and rushed into the error of Balaam for a reward, and perished in the
contradiction of Korah. [1:12]These are breakers at your love-feasts,
feasting with you without fear, feeding themselves, clouds without
water driven about by winds, autumnal trees without fruit, twice dead,
plucked up by the roots, [1:13]wild waves of the sea foaming with their
own shame, wandering stars to which is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever.

5 [1:14]And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of them,
saying, Behold, the Lord came with ten thousand of his saints [1:15]to
execute judgment on all, and to convict all the wicked among them of
all the deeds of impiety which they have impiously committed, and of
all the hard speeches which impious sinners have spoken against him.
[1:16]These are complainers, censorious, walking after their inordinate
desires, and their mouth speaks proud words, showing admiration of
persons for the sake of gain.

6 [1:17]But do you, beloved, remember the words spoken before by the
apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, [1:18]that they said to you, That in
the last time there shall be scoffers, walking in their own impious
desires. [1:19]These are they who separate themselves, sensual, having
not the Spirit. [1:20]But you, beloved, build yourselves up in your
most holy faith, pray with the Holy Spirit. [1:21]Keep yourselves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to
eternal life.  [1:22]And reprove some, separatists, [1:23]and some
save, plucking them from the fire, but have mercy on others with fear,
hating even the garment that is defiled by the flesh.

7 [1:24]And to him that is able to keep you without falling, and to
present you blameless before his glory, with great joy, [1:25]to God
our only Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty,
power and authority before all worlds, both now and for ever more; amen.





