[THE EPISTLE] TO THE HEBREWS. CHAPTER I. CHRIST THE SON OF GOD SUPERIOR TO ANGELS AND TO MOSES.


A.D. 68.

1 [1:1]GOD, who at many times and in many ways spoke anciently to the
fathers by the prophets, [1:2]in these last days spoke to us by his
Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made
the worlds, [1:3]who being the brightness of his glory and the express
image of his substance, and sustaining all things by the word of his
power, having made a purification of sins, sat down on the right hand
of the majesty on high, [1:4]being made as much greater than the angels
as he has inherited a more excellent name than they. [1:5]For to which
of the angels said he at any time, You are my Son, to-day have I
begotten you? And again, I will be to him a Father and he shall be to
me a Son? [1:6]And again, when he brings the first-born into the world
he says, And let all the angels of God worship him. [1:7]And of the
angels he says, Who makes his angels winds, and his ministers a flame
of fire; [1:8]but of the Son, Thy throne, God, is forever and ever; the
sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of rectitude. [1:9]Thou hast loved
righteousness and hated wickedness; therefore God, thy God, anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions. [1:10]And thou,
Lord, in the beginning didst build from its foundations the earth, and
the heavens are works of thy hands; [1:11]they shall perish, but thou
shalt continue; and they shall all become old like a garment, [1:12]and
like a mantle thou shalt fold them up, and they shall be changed, but
thou art the same and thy years shall not fail.  [1:13]And to which of
the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand till I make thy
enemies thy footstool? [1:14]Are they not all ministering spirits, sent
forth to serve on account of those who are about to inherit salvation?

2 [2:1]We ought therefore to attend the more to the things which we
heard, lest at any time we should glide away [from them].  [2:2]For if
the word spoken by angels was firm, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense, [2:3]how shall we escape who
have neglected so great a salvation?  which began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was affirmed to us by those who heard, [2:4]God bearing them
witness with signs and prodigies, and various mighty works and gifts of
the holy Spirit, according to his will.

3 [2:5]For he did not subject to angels the world to come, of which we
speak. [2:6]But one somewhere testified, saying, What is man that thou
art mindful of him, or a son of man that thou visitest him? [2:7]Thou
didst make him a little lower than angels, thou didst crown him with
glory and honor, [2:8]thou didst subject all things under his feet. For
in subjecting all things to him, he left nothing not subjected to him.
But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him. [2:9]But we see
Jesus, made a little less than angels, on account of the suffering of
death crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God he should
taste death for every [man]. [2:10]For it became him, for whom are all
things and through whom are all things, to perfect by sufferings the
prince of their salvation, bringing many sons to glory. [2:11]For both
he that sanctifies and the sanctified are all of one; for which cause
he is not ashamed to call them brothers, [2:12]saying, I will declare
thy name to my brothers, in the midst of the assembly will I sing to
thee. [2:13]And again, I will trust in him. And again, Behold me and
the children which God gave me. [2:14]Since then the children have
partaken of blood and flesh, he in like manner also partook of them,
that through death he might destroy him that has the power of death,
that is the devil, [2:15]and liberate those who all their life were
subjects of servitude to the fear of death.  [2:16]For indeed he helped
not angels, but he helped the descendants of Abraham. [2:17]Whence he
ought in all things to be assimilated to the brothers, that he may be a
merciful and faithful chief priest as to things relating to God, to
make propitiation for the sins of the people. [2:18]For because he has
himself suffered, having been tried, he is able to help the tried.

4 [3:1]Whence, holy brothers, partakers of the heavenly call, consider
the apostle and chief priest of our profession, Jesus, [3:2]who is
faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was in his house.
[3:3]For this man is judged worthy of more glory than Moses, as much as
he has more honor than the house [tabernacle] which he built. [3:4]For
every house is built by some one; but he that built all things is God.
[3:5]And Moses indeed was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for
a testimony of things to be spoken; [3:6]but Christ as a son over his
house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing
of the hope.

5 [3:7]Wherefore, as the Holy Spirit says, To-day if you will hear his
voice, [3:8]harden not your hearts as in the provocation, in the day of
the trial in the wilderness, [3:9]where your fathers fully proved and
saw my works forty years. [3:10]Wherefore I was displeased with that
generation and said, They always err in mind, and they did not know my
ways, [3:11]so I swore in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.
[3:12]See, brothers, that there be not at any time in any one of you an
evil mind of unbelief in departing from the living God; [3:13]but
exhort one another daily, while it is called to-day, that no one of you
may be hardened by the deception of sin; [3:14]for we have been made
partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of the confidence firm to
the end. [3:15]It was said, To-day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts as in the provocation; [3:16]for who having heard
committed provocation? Did not all indeed who came out of Egypt with
Moses?  [3:17]And with whom was he displeased forty years? Was it not
with those that sinned? whose bodies fell in the wilderness?  [3:18]And
to whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest? was it
not to them that disobeyed? [3:19]And we see that they could not enter
in because of unbelief.

6 [4:1]Let us fear, therefore, lest at any time a promise being left us
of entering into his rest, any one of you should seem to come short.
[4:2]For we have also received the good news as they did; but the word
of the report did not profit them, not being accompanied with faith in
those who heard. [4:3]For we enter into the rest who believed, as he
said, I swore in my wrath that they shall not enter into my rest,
although of works made from the foundation of the world. [4:4]For he
spoke in a certain place of the seventh day, thus; And God rested on
the seventh day from all his works. [4:5]And in this place again, They
shall not enter into my rest. [4:6]Since then it remains that some
entered into it, and those to whom it was first preached entered not in
on account of unbelief, [4:7]again he defines a certain day, To-day,
saying in David, after so long a time, as it was said before, To-day if
you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.  [4:8]For if Joshua
caused them to rest he would not have spoken of another day afterwards.

7 [4:9]Therefore a sabbatism remains for the people of God.  [4:10]For
he [Christ] who entered into his rest, also himself rested from his
works, as God from his.

8 [4:11]Let us use diligence, therefore to enter into that rest [the
heavenly rest], that no one may fall, after the same example of
disobedience. [4:12]For the word of God is living, and effective, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, and reaching even to the division of
soul and spirit, and of joints and marrows, and distinguishes thoughts
and intentions of mind; [4:13]and there is nothing which is not
manifest in his sight; for all things are naked and exposed to his
eyes, to whom our discourse relates.




