CHAPTER II. CHRIST A CHIEF PRIEST AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC.


1 [4:14]HAVING therefore a great chief priest who has gone through the
heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast the profession.
[4:15]For we have not a chief priest who cannot sympathise with our
infirmities, but one tried in all respects as we are, without sin.
[4:16]Let us therefore approach with boldness the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy and find grace for timely aid.

2 [5:1]For every chief priest taken from men is appointed in behalf of
men over things relating to God, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices
for sins, [5:2] being able to deal gently with the ignorant and erring,
since he is himself encompassed with infirmity, [5:3]and as for the
people, so also for himself, he is obliged to present offerings for
sins. [5:4]And no one takes the honor on himself but he that is called
by God, even as Aaron also was. [5:5]So also Christ did not put on
himself the honor of being made a chief priest, but he that said to
him, Thou art my Son, to-day have I begotten thee; [5:6]as also in
another place he says, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. [5:7]Who in the days of his flesh having offered both
prayers and supplications to him that was able to save him from death,
with loud cries and tears, [and being heard and delivered] from fear,--
[5:8]although he was a Son, learned obedience from what he suffered,
[5:9]and being made perfect became to all who obey him an author of
eternal salvation, [5:10]being called by God a chief priest after the
order of Melchisedec.

3 [5:11]Concerning whom we have much to say, and that which is
difficult to explain, because you have become dull of hearing.
[5:12]For you who ought on account of the time to be teachers, have
need that one should teach you again what are the first rudiments of
the oracles of God, and have need of milk and not solid food. [5:13]For
every one that partakes of milk is unskilful in the word of
righteousness, for he is a babe; [5:14]but solid food is for the
perfect, having their perceptive faculties exercised by practice to
distinguish both good and evil.

4 [6:1]Wherefore leaving the account of the beginning of Christ, let us
go on to perfection, not laying again the foundation of a change of
mind from dead works, and of faith in God, [6:2]of baptisms taught, and
the imposition of hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of
the eternal judgment. [6:3] And this we will do if God permits.
[6:4]For those once enlightened and having tasted of the heavenly gift
and been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, [6:5] and having tasted of
the good word of God and the powers of the life to come, [6:6]and
having fallen away, it is impossible again to renew to a change of
mind, they having crucified again and exposed to shame the Son of God.
[6:7]But the land which drinks in the rain that often falls on it, and
produces plants beneficial to those by whom it is cultivated, receives
a blessing from God; [6:8]but that which produces thorns and thistles
is disapproved, and is nigh to a curse, the end of which is to be
burned.

5 [6:9]But we are persuaded better things of you, beloved, and things
pertaining to salvation, though we thus speak. [6:10]For God is not
unjust, to forget your work, and the love which you showed for his
name, having served the saints and [still] serving them. [6:11]But we
desire each of you to show the same diligence to the full assurance of
hope to the end, [6:12]that you be not stupid, but followers of those
who through faith and patience inherit the promises. [6:13]For God
haying promised Abraham, when he could not swear by a greater, swore by
himself, [6:14]saying, Surely, blessing I will bless you, and
multiplying I will multiply you; [6:15]and so having waited long he
obtained the promise. [6:16]For men indeed swear by a greater, and an
oath for confirmation is to them an end of all dispute; [6:17]for which
cause, God wishing more abundantly to show to the heirs of the promise
the immutability of his purpose, interposed with an oath, [6:18]that by
two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong consolation, who fled to lay hold on the hope set
before us, [6:19]which we have as an anchor of the soul, sure and firm,
and entering within the vail, [6:20]where our forerunner Jesus entered,
made after the order of Melchisedec a chief priest forever.

6 [7:1]For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high
God, who met Abraham as he returned from the slaughter of the kings and
blessed him, [7:2]to whom also Abraham gave a tenth of all, first being
interpreted king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which
is king of peace, [7:3] without father, without mother, without
genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor end of life, but
being made like the Son of God, continues a priest forever.

7 [7:4]And behold, how great this man was, to whom even Abraham the
patriarch gave a tenth of the spoils. [7:5]And the sons of Levi who
receive the priesthood, have a commandment to tithe the people
according to the law, that is their brothers, although descended from
Abraham; [7:6]but he whose descent is not reckoned from them received
tithes of Abraham, and blessed him who has the promises. [7:7]But
beyond all contradiction, the less is blessed by the greater. [7:8]And
here, men who die receive tithes, but there, one of whom it is
testified that he lives. [7:9]And so to speak, Levi also who receives
tithes paid tithes through Abraham; [7:10]for he was yet in his father
when Melchisedec met him.

8 [7:11]If therefore there was perfection through the Levitical
priesthood,--for the people received the law under it,--what need was
there that another priest should arise after the order of Melchisedec
and not to be called after the order of Aaron?  [7:12]For the
priesthood being changed, of necessity also there is made a change of
the law. [7:13]For he of whom these things are said belonged to another
tribe, of which no one attended to the altar; [7:14] for it is evident
that our Lord arose from Judah, in respect to which tribe Moses said
nothing concerning priests. [7:15]And moreover, [this] is still further
evident, if another priest is raised up according to the likeness of
Melchisedec, [7:16]who was not a priest after the law of an external
commandment, but after the power of imperishable life.  [7:17]For it is
testified, Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchisedec.
[7:18]For there is an abrogation of the commandment which goes before,
on account of its weakness and unprofitableness; [7:19]for the law made
nothing perfect, but was the introduction of a better hope through
which we draw nigh to God. [7:20]And as he was not [constituted]
without swearing,-- [7:21]for they were made priests without swearing,
but he with swearing by him who says to him, The Lord swore, and he
will not change, You are a priest forever;-- [7:22]by so much is Jesus
the pledge of a better covenant. [7:23]And they indeed were made many
priests, on account of being forbidden by death to continue; [7:24]but
he, on account of his continuing for ever, has a priesthood which
passes not away, [7:25]whence also he is able to save forever those who
come to God through him, always living to intercede for them.

9 [7:26]For such a chief priest also was suitable for us, holy,
harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens, [7:27]who has no need daily as the chief priests first to
present sacrifices for their sins, then for those of the people; for
this he did once for all, having offered himself.  [7:28]For the law
constitutes men chief priests having infirmity, but the word of the
oath which is after the law the Son made perfect forever.




