CHAPTER III. CHRIST THE AUTHOR OF A NEW COVENANT AND OF ITS BLESSINGS.


1 [8:1]BUT the chief thing in addition to what has been said is, that
we have such a chief priest who sat on the right hand of the throne of
the majesty in the heavens, [8:2]a minister of the sanctuary, and of
the true tabernacle, which the Lord set up, not man. [8:3]For every
chief priest is constituted to offer gifts and sacrifices, whence it
was necessary that this man also should have something to offer.
[8:4]For if he had been on earth he would not have been a priest, there
being priests to offer, the gifts according to the law, [8:5]who serve
for a symbol and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was divinely
instructed when about to make the tabernacle; for see, he says, that
you make all things after the pattern shown you in the Mount; [8:6]but
now he has obtained a more excellent service, by as much also as he is
the mediator of a better covenant, which is established on better
promises.  2 [8:7]For if that first covenant had been faultless, no
place would have been sought for the second. [But it was not].
[8:8]For finding fault with them he says, Behold, the days come, says
the Lord, that I will make with the house of Israel and the house of
Judah, a new covenant, [8:9]not according to the covenant which I made
with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to lead
them out of Egypt, for they continued not in my covenant, and I
neglected them, says the Lord.  [8:10]This is the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will
put my laws in their minds, and will write them in their hearts, and I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. [8:11]And they
shall not teach every one his [fellow] citizen, and every one his
brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least
to the greatest of them. [8:12]For I will be merciful to their
wickedness, and their sins and transgressions will I remember no more.
[8:13]By saying new, he made the first old; but that which is ancient
and weak is about to perish.

3 [9:1]The first covenant then had ordinances of divine service and a
worldly sanctuary. [9:2]For the first tabernacle was provided, in which
were the candlestick and the table and the show bread, which is called
the sanctuary. [9:3]But behind the second vail is the tabernacle,
called the inner sanctuary, [9:4]having the golden censer and the ark
of the covenant overlaid on every side with gold, in which were the
golden vase that had the manna and Aaron's rod that budded and the
tables of the covenant, [9:5]and over it were the cherubs of glory,
overshadowing the propitiation; of which it is not necessary now to
speak particularly.

4 [9:6]And these being thus provided, the priests enter into the first
tabernacle continually, performing the services, [9:7]but into the
second once a year only the chief priest [enters], not without blood,
which he offers for his errors and those of the people, [9:8]the Holy
Spirit showing this, that the way into the sanctuary is not made
manifest while the first tabernacle yet has a standing, [9:9]which is a
type of the time at hand, in which gifts and sacrifices are offered
that cannot perfect the worshipper as to the conscience, [9:10]only in
meats and drinks and different baptisms, and external ordinances,
imposed till the time of reformation.

5 [9:11]But Christ having come, a chief priest of the good times that
were to come, with a greater and a more perfect tabernacle not made
with hands, that is, not of this creation, [9:12]not with blood of
goats and bullocks, but with his own blood, entered once into the
sanctuary having found eternal redemption.  [9:13]For if the blood of
bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling the defiled,
sanctifies to the purification of the flesh, [9:14]how much more shall
the blood of Christ, who with an eternal spirit offered himself without
fault to God, purify your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God.

6 [9:15]And for this cause he is the mediator of the new covenant, that
death having been for a redemption of transgressions [transgressors]
under the first covenant, the called might receive the promise of the
eternal inheritance.  [9:16]For where there is a covenant, there must
follow the death of the covenant-maker. [9:17]For a covenant is strong
for the dead, since it is never strong [unalterable] when the
covenant-maker lives; [9:18]whence also the first [covenant] was not
initiated without blood. [9:19]For every commandment of the law having
been spoken by Moses to all the people, taking the blood of bullocks
and goats with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, he sprinkled both the
book itself and all the people, [9:20]saying, This is the blood of the
covenant which God has enjoined upon you. [9:21]And he sprinkled also
the tabernacle, and all the implements of the service, in like manner,
with blood. [9:22]And almost all things, according to the law, are
purified with blood, and without the pouring out of blood there is no
forgiveness.

7 [9:23]It was necessary, therefore, that the symbols of things in the
heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these. [9:24]For Christ did not
enter into the sanctuary made with hands, a type of the true, but into
heaven itself, and already has appeared before God for us, [9:25]not
that he may often present himself, as the chief priest enters into the
sanctuary once a year with the blood of another [being]; [9:26]since it
was necessary that it should suffer often from the foundation of the
world, but now once at the consummation of the world he has been
manifested to destroy sins by the sacrifice of himself. [9:27]And as it
is appointed to men once to die, but after this is the judgment,
[9:28]so also Christ having been once offered to bear the sins of many,
shall appear a second time without sin, to those who look for him for
salvation.

8 [10:1]For the law having a shadow of the good things that were to
come, not the very likeness of the things, could not by the sacrifices
which they offered continually every year perfect the offerers;
[10:2]if they could, would they not have ceased to be offered, because
those serving would have had no longer a knowledge of sins, having been
once purified? [10:3]But in them there was a remembrance of sins, year
by year; [10:4]for it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats
should take away sins. [10:5]Wherefore, coming into the world, he says,
A sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire, but a body didst thou
prepare me. [10:6]Whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou
wast not pleased with; [10:7]then I said, Behold, I come,--in the
volume of the book it is written of me,--to do thy will, O God.
[10:8]Saying before, Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings
and [sacrifices] for sin thou didst not desire and wast not pleased
with, which are offered according to the law, [10:9] then he said,
Behold, I come to do thy will. He takes away the first, that he may
establish the second, [10:10]by which will we have been sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all.

9 [10:11]And every priest stood daily performing service and presenting
often the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins; [10:12]but
this [priest] having offered one sacrifice forever for sins, sat down
on the right hand of God, [10:13]henceforth waiting till his enemies
are made his footstool. [10:14] For by one offering he has perfected
forever the sanctified. [10:15]The Holy Spirit also testifies [this] to
us; for after it had said before, [10:16]This is the covenant which I
will make with them after those days, the Lord says, I will put my laws
in their hearts, and in their minds will I write them, [10:17] and
their sins and transgressions will I remember no more. [10:18]But where
there is a forgiveness of these, an offering for sin is no longer
required.




