CHAPTER IV. THE CONTEMPLATION OF CHRIST, FAITH AND ITS MARTYRS.


1 [10:19]HAVING therefore, brothers, confidence in respect to the
entrance into the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus, [10:20]which
[entrance] he consecrated for us a new and living way through the vail,
that is his flesh, [10:21]and [having] a great priest over the house of
God, [10:22]let us approach with a true heart in a full assurance of
faith, sprinkled in heart from an evil conscience, and washed in body
with pure water, [10:23]let us hold firmly the profession of the faith,
without declining; for he is faithful that promised; [10:24]and let us
observe one another for a provocation of love and of good works,
[10:25]not forsaking our own congregation as some are in the habit of
[doing], but exhorting [others], and so much the more as you see the
day approaching.

2 [10:26]For if we sin willingly after having received the knowledge of
the truth, there is no longer a sacrifice left for sins, [10:27]but a
fearful expectation of judgment and fiery indignation, which is about
to consume the adversaries.  [10:28]Any one who despised the law of
Moses died without mercy by two or three witnesses; [10:29]of how much
greater punishment do you suppose he will be thought worthy, who has
trodden down the Son of God, and accounted defiled the blood of the
covenant with which he was purified, and treated injuriously the Spirit
of grace. [10:30]For we know him that said, Judgment belongs to me, I
will repay. And again, The Lord will judge his people. [10:31] It is
fearful to fall into the hands of the living God.

3 [10:32]But remember the former days, in which having been enlightened
you endured a great conflict with sufferings, [10:33]partly in being
made a spectacle by reproaches and afflictions, and partly being
companions of those so treated.  [10:34]For you sympathized with those
in bonds, and received with joy the plunder of your property, knowing
that you have for yourselves a better possession, and one that endures.
[10:35]Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has a great
reward.  [10:36]For you have need of patience, that having done the
will of God you may receive the promise. [10:37]For yet a very little
while, and he that is to come will come and will not delay; [10:38] but
my righteous one shall live by faith, and if he draws back my soul
takes no pleasure in him. [10:39]But we are not of those who draw back
to perdition, but of faith to the saving of the soul.

4 [11:1]But faith is a confidence in respect to things hoped for, a
conviction of things not seen. [11:2]For by it the ancients obtained a
good repute. [11:3] We know by faith that the worlds were made by the
word of God, that the seen was not made from the apparent. [11:4]By
faith Abel offered to God a greater sacrifice than Cain, through which
he was declared to be righteous, God testifying to his gifts, and
through the same, having died, he speaks still. [11:5]By faith Enoch
was translated without seeing death, and was not found because God
translated him. For before the translation he was said to have pleased
God; [11:6]but without faith it is impossible to please; for he that
comes to God, must believe that he is and that he is a rewarder of
those that seek him.

5 [11:7]By faith Noah having been divinely instructed concerning things
not yet seen, fearing built the ark for the salvation of his house, by
which he condemned the world, and became an heir of the righteousness
by faith.

6 [11:8]By faith Abraham being called obeyed and went out to a place
which he was to receive for an inheritance, and went out not knowing
where he was going. [11:9]By faith he resided temporarily in the land
of promise, as in a foreign land, living in tents, with Isaac and
Jacob, co-heirs of the same promise; [11:10]for he looked for the city
which has foundations [fixed abodes] whose designer and builder is God.
[11:11]By faith also Sarah herself received power to become a mother,
even beyond the usual age, because she regarded him faithful that
promised.  [11:12]Wherefore also there were born of one, and those of
one dead, [a posterity] like the stars of heaven for multitude, and
like the sands on the sea-shore innumerable.

7 [11:13]All these died in faith not having received the promises, but
having seen and saluted them from a distance, and having professed that
they were foreigners and strangers on the earth. [11:14]For those who
say such things show that they seek a native country. [11:15]And if
they had remembered that country from which they went out, they would
have had opportunity to return; [11:16]but now they seek a better, that
is a heavenly [country]. Wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be
called their God; for he has prepared for them a city.

8 [11:17]By faith Abraham when tried offered Isaac, and he that
received the promises offered his only son, [11:18]of whom it was said,
In Isaac shall your posterity be called, [11:19]judging that God was
able to raise even from the dead; whence also in a figure he received
him. [11:20]By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau in respect to
things to come. [11:21]By faith Jacob dying, blessed each of the sons
of Joseph and worshipped leaning on the top of his staff. [11:22]By
faith Joseph at the close of life made mention of the exodus of the
children of Israel and gave charge concerning his bones.

9 [11:23]By faith Moses when he was born was hid three months by his
parents, because they saw that the child was beautiful, and they feared
not the command of the king. [11:24]By faith Moses when he became a man
refused to be called a son of Pharaoh's daughter, [11:25]choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to have an
enjoyment of sin for a time, [11:26]judging the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect to the
reward. [11:27]By faith he left Egypt, not having feared the
displeasure of the king; for he endured as seeing him that is
invisible. [11:28] By faith he observed the passover and the pouring
out of blood, that the destroyer of the first-born might not touch
them. [11:29]By faith they passed through the Red Sea as through dry
land, which the Egyptians attempting were swallowed up. [11:30]By faith
the walls of Jericho fell down when they had been surrounded seven
days. [11:31]By faith Rahab the harlot escaped destruction with the
disobedient, having received the spies in peace.

10 [11:32]And why should I say more? For time would fail me to relate
of Gideon and Barak, and Sampson and Jepthah, and David and Samuel and
the prophets, [11:33]who by faith subdued kingdoms, performed
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
[11:34]extinguished the power of fire, escaped the edge of the sword,
from weakness were made strong, became mighty in war, put to flight
encampments of foreigners; [11:35]women received their dead from a
resurrection, others were tortured having not accepted redemption, that
they might obtain a better resurrection; [11:36]and others had trial of
mockings and scourges, and besides of bonds and imprisonment;
[11:37]they were stoned, they were cut to pieces with saws, they were
tried, they died with the death of the sword, they wandered about in
sheep-skins and goat-skins, destitute, afflicted, injuriously treated,
[11:38]of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in deserts and
mountains, and in caves and openings of the earth.  [11:39]And none of
these who became martyrs through faith received the promise, [11:40]God
having provided something better for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect.

11 [12:1]Therefore also we, having so great a cloud of witnesses lying
around us, laying aside every impediment and sin which entirely
surrounds us, let us run with patience the race set before us,
[12:2]looking to the chief guide and perfecter of the faith, Jesus, who
for the joy set before him despised the shame and endured the cross,
and sat down on the right hand of God.  [12:3]For consider him that has
endured such a contradiction from sinners, that you may not become
faint and weary in your minds.




