CHAPTER V. DIVINE CHASTENING, MOUNT SINAI AND MOUNT ZION, MORAL DUTIES, ETC.


1 [12:4]You have not yet resisted to blood contending against sin.
[12:5]And you have forgotten the exhortation which says to you as to
sons, My son, despise not the correction of the Lord and faint not when
rebuked by him, [12:6]for the Lord corrects those whom he loves, and
chastises every son whom he receives.  [12:7]If you endure correction,
God deals with you as sons; for what son is there whom his father does
not correct? [12:8]But if you are without correction of which all are
partakers, then you are of foreign birth, and not sons. [12:9]
Moreover, we have had fathers of our flesh who corrected us and we
respected them; shall we not much more be subject to the Father of
spirits and live? [12:10]For they for a few days corrected us as seemed
good to them, but he for the best, that we may partake of his holiness.
[12:11]And no correction seems to be joyful for the present but
painful, but afterwards it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness
to those exercised by it.

2 [12:12]Wherefore hold up the hands that hang down, and the feeble
knees, [12:13]and make straight courses for your feet, that the lame
may not be turned out of the way, but may rather be healed.
[12:14]Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no one
shall see the Lord, [12:15]taking care that no one may come short of
the grace of God, that no root of bitterness springing up may make
trouble and by it many be defiled, [12:16]that no one may be a
fornicator or unholy person like Esau, who for one meal sold his
birthright. [12:17]For you know that afterwards, wishing also to
inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place for a
change of mind, though he sought it with tears. [12:18]For you have not
come to a mountain that may be touched, and to a burning fire, and
blackness and darkness and a tempest [12:19]and the sound of a trumpet
and the voice of words, which those who heard desired that the word
might not be spoken to them any more,-- [12:20]for they could not bear
what was commanded, And if a beast touches the mountain it shall be
stoned; [12:21]and so fearful was the sight, that Moses said, I fear
and tremble,-- [12:22]but you have come to Zion, the mountain and city
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels in
general assembly, [12:23]and to the church of the first-born who are
enrolled in heaven, and to a judge the God of all, and to spirits of
the righteous made perfect, [12:24]and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, and to a sprinkled blood which speaks better than Abel.

3 [12:25]See that you refuse not him that speaks; for if they did not
escape who refused him that gave answers on earth, much more shall we
[not escape] who turn ourselves away from him in heaven; [12:26]whose
voice then shook the earth, but now it has been promised, saying,
Hereafter once for all I will shake not only the earth, but also
heaven. [12:27]And this, Hereafter once for all, signifies the removal
of the things shaken as of things made, that those not shaken may
continue. [12:28]Wherefore, receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken,
let us have grace through which we may serve God acceptably, with piety
and fear; [12:29]for our God is also a consuming fire.

4 [13:1]Let brotherly love continue. [13:2]Forget not hospitality; for
by this some without knowing it have entertained angels. [13:3]Remember
those bound as bound with them, and those injured as being yourselves
also in the body. [13:4] Marriage is honorable in all, and married life
without blame; but fornicators and adulterers God will judge. [13:5]Let
your life be without avarice, and be contented with what you have; for
he said, I will never leave you, I will never forsake you; [13:6]so
that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear;
what can man do to me?

5 [13:7]Remember your guides who spoke to you the word of God, and
considering the end of their life follow the faith.  [13:8]Jesus Christ
is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever.  [13:9]Be not carried about
with various and strange doctrines; for it is good that the mind should
be established with grace, not with aliments, in which those walking
are not profited.

6 [13:10]We have an altar of which those who serve the tabernacle have
no right to eat. [13:11]For the bodies of those animals whose blood is
carried into the sanctuary by the chief priest are burnt without the
encampment. [13:12] Wherefore also Jesus, that he might purify the
people through his blood, suffered without the gate. [13:13]Let us
therefore go out to him without the encampment, bearing his reproach;
[13:14]for we have not here a city that continues, but we seek that
which is to come.  [13:15]Through him, therefore, let us offer the
sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of lips
confessing his name. [13:16]And forget not beneficence and liberality;
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

7 [13:17]Obey your guides and be in subjection; for they watch for your
souls as having to give an account, that they may do this with joy and
not with grief; for this is unprofitable for you.

8 [13:18]Pray for us; for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things wishing to live well. [13:19]And I exhort you do this the more,
that I may sooner be restored to you.

9 [13:20]And may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the
great shepherd of the sheep with the blood of the eternal covenant, our
Lord Jesus, [13:21]perfect you in every good work to do his will, doing
in you that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to
whom be the glory forever; amen.

10 [13:22]And I beseech you, brothers, suffer the word of exhortation;
for I have sent to you a letter in a few words.  [13:23]Know that
brother Timothy has been released, with whom, if he comes soon, I will
see you. [13:24]Salute all your guides and all the saints. Those from
Italy salute you. [13:25]The grace be with you all; amen.





