REVELATION BY JOHN. PATMOS, A.D. 68. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION, A VISION OF CHRIST


1 [1:1]A REVELATION of Jesus Christ, which God gave him, to show his
servants [things] which must shortly occur, and he sent and made them
known by his angel to his servant John, [1:2]who declared the word of
God and the testimony of Jesus Christ which he saw. [1:3]Blessed is he
that reads, and those that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the
things written in it; for the time is at hand.

2 [1:4]John, to the seven churches in Asia. Grace and peace be to you,
from the Is and the Was and the Is to come, and from the seven spirits
which are before his throne, [1:5]and from Jesus Christ, the faithful
witness, the first born from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of
the earth. To him that loved us and washed us from our sins with his
blood, [1:6]and made us a kingdom, priests to God even his Father, to
him be the glory and the power forever; amen.

3 [1:7]Behold, he comes with the clouds, and every eye shall see him
and those who pierced him, and all the tribes of the earth shall mourn
because of him. Yes, amen. [1:8]I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the
Lord God; the Is, and the Was, and the Is to come, the Almighty.

4 [1:9]I, John, your brother and companion in the affliction and
kingdom and patience in Christ Jesus, was in the island called Patmos
on account of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.  [1:10]I was
in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a loud voice as of
a trumpet, [1:11]saying, What you see write in a book, and send to the
seven churches, to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamus and to
Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea.

5 [1:12]And I turned to see the voice which spoke with me; and having
turned around I saw seven golden candlesticks, [1:13]and in the midst
of the candlesticks one like the Son of man, clothed with a robe
extending down to his feet, girded about the breasts with a golden
girdle; [1:14]and his head and hairs were white as white wool, as snow,
and his eyes like a flame of fire, [1:15]and his feet like fine brass
as if they were burned in a furnace, and his voice like the sound of
many waters, [1:16]and he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of
his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword, and his face shone like
the sun in his strength.

6 [1:17]And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead; and he put his
right hand on me, saying, Fear not; I am the first and the last
[1:18]and the living, and I was dead, and behold, I am living forever
and ever; and I have the keys of death and of hades. [1:19]Write
therefore the things which you saw, and which are, and which are about
to appear hereafter, [1:20]the mystery of the seven stars which you saw
in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars
are angels of the seven churches, and the seven candlesticks the seven
churches.




