CHAPTER II. LETTERS TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES.


1 [2:1]To the angel of the church in Ephesus write, These things says
he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst
of the seven golden candlesticks, [2:2]I know your works and your labor
and your patience, and that you cannot bear the wicked, and you tried
those who say they are apostles and are not, and found them false;
[2:3]and you have patience, and suffered for my name, and did not
faint. [2:4]But I have against you that you have left your first love.
[2:5]Remember therefore whence you have fallen, and change your minds,
and do the first works, otherwise I will come to you and remove your
candlestick from its place, unless you change your minds. [2:6]But you
have this, that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also
hate. [2:7]Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the
churches; To him that conquers will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the paradise of my God.

2 [2:8]And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write, These things
says the first and the last, who was dead and lived, [2:9]I know your
affliction and poverty, but you are rich, and the blasphemy of those
who say they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
[2:10]Fear not what you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about
to cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried, and you shall
have affliction ten days. Be faithful till death, and I will give you
the crown of life. [2:11]Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit
says to the churches; He that conquers shall not be injured by the
second death.

3 [2:12]And to the angel of the church in Pergamus write, These things
says he that has the two-edged sharp sword, [2:13]I know your works and
where you live; where Satan's throne is; and you hold my name, and did
not deny my faith in the days in which Antipas my faithful martyr was
killed among you, where Satan dwells. [2:14]But I have a few things
against you; you have there those who hold the doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balak to put an occasion of sin before the children of Israel,
both to eat things offered to idols and to commit fornication. [2:15]So
in like manner you have also those who hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans. [2:16]Change your minds therefore; otherwise I will come
to you quickly, and fight with them with the sword of my mouth.
[2:17]Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the
churches; To him that conquers will I give of the hidden manna, and I
will give him a white token, and on the token a new name engraved,
which no one knows but he that receives it.

4 [2:18]And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write, These things
says the Son of God, he that has his eyes like a flame of fire and his
feet like fine brass, [2:19]I know your works and love and faith and
service and your patience, and your last works more than the first.
[2:20]But I have against you that you allow your wife Jezebel, who says
she is a prophetess and teaches and deceives my servants to commit
fornication and eat things offered to idols. [2:21]And I gave her time
to change her mind, and she will not change her mind from her
fornication. [2:22]Behold, I will cast her on a [sick] bed, and those
committing adultery with her into great affliction, unless they change
their minds from her works. [2:23]And her children will I kill with
pestilence, and all the churches shall know that I am he that searches
the minds and hearts, and I will give you each one according to your
works. [2:24]But I say to the rest of you in Thyatira who have not this
doctrine, who have not known the depths of Satan, as they say, I will
put on you no other burden; [2:25]but what you have, hold fast till I
come. [2:26]And to him that conquers and keeps my works till the end, I
will give power over the nations, [2:27]and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron, and crush them like earthen vessels, as I also have
received of my Father, [2:28]and I will give him the star of the
morning. [2:29]Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.

5 [3:1]And to the angel of the church in Sardis write, These things
says he that has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars, I know
your works, that you have a name to live, and are dead. [3:2]Be
watchful, confirm the rest who are about to die.  For I have not found
your works perfect before my God. [3:3] Remember therefore how you have
received and heard, and watch, and change your minds. If therefore you
do not watch, I will come as a thief, and you shall not know at what
hour I will come upon you. [3:4]But you have a few names in Sardis who
have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white,
for they are worthy. [3:5]He that conquers shall be clothed in white
robes, and I will not obliterate his name from the book of life, and I
will confess his name before my Father and before his angels. [3:6]Let
him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the churches.

6 [3:7]And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write, These
things says the Holy One, the True, he that has the key of David, he
that opens and no one shall shut, and shuts and no one shall open,
[3:8]I know your works; behold, I have placed before you an opened
door, which no man can shut; because you have a little power, and kept
my word, and did not deny my name.  [3:9]Behold, I will make those of
the synagogue of Satan who say they are Jews, and are not, but lie,
behold, I will make them come and worship at your feet, and they shall
know that I have loved you. [3:10]Because you have kept the word of my
patience, I also will keep you from the hour of trial which is to come
on all the world, to try those who dwell on the earth. [3:11]I come
quickly; keep what you have, that no man may take your crown.
[3:12]Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the temple of my God,
and he shall go out of it no more, and I will write on him the name of
my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which
comes down out of heaven from my God, and my new name. [3:13]Let him
that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the churches.

7 [3:14]And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write, These things
says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creation of God, [3:15]I know your works, that you are neither cold nor
hot. I wish you were cold or hot.  [3:16]Because therefore you are
warm, and neither hot nor cold, I am about to spew you out of my mouth.
[3:17]For you say, I am rich and have become rich and have need of
nothing, and know not that you are miserable, and pitiable, and poor,
and blind, and naked. [3:18]I advise you to buy of me gold purified in
the fire that you may be rich, and white robes that you may put on, and
the shame of your nakedness not appear, and an eye-salve to anoint your
eyes that you may see. [3:19]As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten;
be zealous therefore and change your minds.  [3:20]Behold, I stand at
the door and knock; if any one shall hear my voice and open the door, I
will enter in to him, and feast with him, and he with me. [3:21]To him
that conquers will I give to sit down with me on my throne, as I
conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne. [3:22]Let him that
has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the churches.




