CHAPTER III. THE HEAVENLY WORLD, THE THRONE OF GOD AND HIS COURT--THE ELDERS, CHERUBS, SEALED BOOK, LAMB, ETC.


1 [4:1]AFTER this I saw, and behold, a door was opened in heaven, and
the first voice which I heard was of a trumpet speaking to me, saying,
Come up hither, and I will show you things that must occur hereafter.
[4:2]And immediately I was in the Spirit; and behold, a throne was set
in heaven, and one sat on the throne.  [4:3]And he that sat was like a
jasper and sardine stone, and there was an iris about the throne,
similar in appearance to an emerald. [4:4]And about the throne were
twenty-four thrones; and on the thrones twenty-four elders sitting
clothed in white robes, and having crowns of gold on their heads.

2 [4:5]And there proceeded from the throne lightnings and voices and
thunders; and seven lamps of fire were burning before the throne, which
are the seven spirits of God, [4:6]and before the throne was as it were
a sea of glass like crystal; and in the midst of the throne and about
the throne were four living ones [cherubs] full of eyes before and
behind. [4:7]And the first cherub was like a lion, and the second
cherub like a bullock, and the third cherub had the face of a man, and
the fourth cherub was like a flying eagle.

3 [4:8]And the four cherubs had each six wings apiece. And they were
full of eyes around and within, and they had no rest day nor night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty the Was and the Is
and the Is to come. [4:9]And when the cherubs gave glory and honor and
thanks to him that sat on the throne who lives forever and ever,
[4:10]the twenty-four elders fell down on their faces before him that
sat on the throne, and worshipped him that lives forever and ever, and
cast their crowns before his throne, saying, [4:11]Thou art worthy, our
Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power, for thou hast
created all things, and on account of thy will they are and were
created.

4 [5:1]And I saw at the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals. [5:2]And I
saw a mighty angel proclaim with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open
the book and to break its seven seals?  [5:3]And no one in heaven
above, nor on the earth, nor under the earth, could open the book, or
look in it. [5:4]And I wept much because no one was found worthy to
open the book or to look in it. [5:5]And one of the elders said to me,
Weep not; behold, the lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David,
has conquered, he is opening the book and its seven seals.

5 [5:6]And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four cherubs and
in the midst of the elders, a lamb standing as if killed, having seven
horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent into all
the earth. [5:7]And he came and took [the book] from the right hand of
him that sat on the throne.

6 [5:8]And when he took the book, the four cherubs and the twenty-four
elders fell down before the lamb, each having a harp and golden bowls
full of incense, which is the prayers of the saints: [5:9]And they sung
a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book and to open its
seals, for thou wast killed and hast redeemed to God with thy blood
[men] from every tribe and tongue and people and nation, [5:10]and hast
made them a kingdom and priests, and they shall reign on the earth.
[5:11]And I saw, and heard a voice of many angels about the throne, and
of the cherubs, and of the elders,--and the number of them was ten
thousands of ten thousands and thousands of thousands,-- [5:12]saying
with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing. [5:13]And every creature which is in heaven, and on the
earth, and under the earth, and those which are on the sea, and all
things in them, all heard I saying, To him that sits on the throne and
to the Lamb be blessing and honor and glory and power forever and ever.
[5:14]And the four cherubs said, Amen. And the elders fell down and
worshipped:




