CHAPTER IV. THE FIRST SIX SEALS OF THE BOOK OF PROPHECY, THE SEALING OF GOD'S SERVANTS, ETC.


1 [6:1]AND I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and heard
one of the four cherubs say like the sound of thunder, Come. [6:2]And I
saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat on it had a bow, and a
crown was given him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer.

2 [6:3]And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second cherub
say, Come. [6:4]And there went out another fiery horse, and it was
given to him that sat on it to take peace from the earth, and that they
should kill one another, and there was given him a great sword.

3 [6:5]And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third cherub say,
Come. And I saw, and behold, a black horse, and he that sat on it had a
pair of scales in his hand. [6:6]And I heard a voice in the midst of
the four cherubs, saying, A choenix [a quart] of wheat for a denarius
[14 cents], and three choenices of barley for a denarius; and injure
not the oil and wine.

4 [6:7]And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth cherub
say, Come. [6:8]And I saw, and behold, a pale horse, and one sat on it,
whose name was Death, and Hades followed him, and there was given him
power over a fourth part of the earth to kill with the sword and with
famine and with pestilence and by the beasts of the earth.

5 [6:9]And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of those killed for the word of God and for the testimony which
they had. [6:10] And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long,
Master, holy and true, do you not judge and avenge our blood on those
that dwell on the earth? [6:11]And a white robe was given them, and it
was told them to rest yet a little while, till their fellow servants
and their brothers and those about to be killed as they also had been
should finish [their testimony].

6 [6:12]And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and there was a great
earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and all the
moon became as blood, [6:13]and the stars of heaven fell to the earth,
as a fig tree casts down its unseasonable figs when shaken with a
mighty wind, [6:14]and heaven departed like a book rolled up, and every
mountain and island were moved from their places. [6:15]And the kings
of the earth and the great men and the chiliarchs and the rich and the
mighty and every servant and freeman hid themselves in caves and in the
rocks of the mountains, [6:16]and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall
on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne and
from the wrath of the Lamb, [6:17]for the great day of his wrath has
come, and who can stand?

7 [7:1]And after this I saw four angels standing on the four corners of
the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that no wind might blow
on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.  [7:2]And I saw another
angel ascend from the east, having the seal of the living God, and he
cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to
injure the earth and the sea, [7:3] saying, Injure not the earth nor
the sea nor the trees, till we seal the servants of our God on their
foreheads. [7:4]And I heard the number of the sealed, a hundred and
forty-four thousand were sealed from every tribe of the children of
Israel.

8 [7:5]From the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, from the
tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, from the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
[7:6]from the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, from the tribe of
Naphtali twelve thousand, from the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
[7:7]from the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, from the tribe of Levi
twelve thousand, from the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand, [7:8]from
the tribe of Zebulon twelve thousand, from the tribe of Joseph twelve
thousand, from the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand.

9 [7:9]After this I saw, and behold, a great multitude, which no man
could number, of every nation and of all tribes and peoples and
tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed with
white robes, and having palm branches in their hands; [7:10]and they
cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation be to our God who sits on
the throne and to the Lamb. [7:11]And all the angels stood around the
throne and the elders and the four cherubs, and fell down before the
throne on their faces, and worshipped God, [7:12]saying, Amen, blessing
and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving and honor and power and strength
be to our God forever and ever.

10 [7:13]And one of the elders answered and said to me, Who are those
clothed with white robes, and whence did they come?  [7:14]And I said
to him, My Lord, you know. And he said to me, These are those who come
out from great affliction, and washed their robes and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb. [7:15] Therefore they are before the throne
of God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sits on
the throne will dwell among them. [7:16]And they shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun strike them nor any
heat, [7:17]for the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne shall feed
them and lead them to fountains of the waters of life, and God shall
wipe away every tear from their eyes.




