CHAPTER V. THE SEVENTH SEAL, THE FIRST FIVE TRUMPETS, THE STAR THAT FELL FROM HEAVEN, THE LOCUSTS, ETC.


1 [8:1]AND when he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven
about half an hour. [8:2]And I saw the seven angels who stand before
God, and there were given them seven trumpets.  [8:3]And another angel
came and stood by the altar, having a golden censer, and there was
given him much incense to present with the prayers of all the saints on
the golden altar before the throne. [8:4] And a cloud of incense
ascended with the prayers of the saints from the hand of the angel
before God. [8:5]And the angel took the censer and filled it from the
fire of the altar, and cast it on the earth; and there were thunders
and lightning and voices and an earthquake.

2 [8:6]And the seven angels having the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound. [8:7]And the first sounded; and there was hail and
fire mingled with blood, and it was cast on the earth; and a third part
of the earth was consumed, and a third part of the trees were consumed,
and all the green grass was consumed.

3 [8:8]And the second angel sounded; and the appearance of a great
mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea; and a third part of
the sea became blood, [8:9]and a third part of the creatures in the sea
having life died, and a third part of the ships were destroyed.

4 [8:10]And the third angel sounded; and there fell from heaven a great
star, burning like a lamp, and it fell on a third part of the rivers
and on the fountains of waters. [8:11]And the name of the star was
called Bitterness. And a third part of the waters became bitter, and
many men died by the waters, because they were bitter.

5 [8:12]And the fourth angel sounded; and a third part of the sun was
smitten, and a third part of the moon, and a third part of the stars,
and a third part of them were darkened, and the day did not appear a
third part of it, nor the night. [8:13]And I saw, and heard an eagle
flying in the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe,
to those who live on the earth on account of the other voices of the
trumpet of the three angels who are about to sound.

6 [9:1]And the fifth angel sounded; and I saw a star fall from heaven
to the earth, and there was given him the key of the pit of the abyss.
[9:2]And he opened the pit of the abyss; and there arose up a smoke
from the pit, like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the
air were darkened by the smoke of the pit.  [9:3]And from the smoke
went out locusts on the earth, and power was given them like the power
which scorpions of the earth have.  [9:4]And it was told them not to
injure the grass of the earth nor any green thing nor any tree, but the
men who had not the seal of God on their foreheads. [9:5]And it was
given them not to kill them, but to sting them five months; and their
sting was like the sting of a scorpion, when he strikes a man. [9:6]And
in those days men shall seek death and not find it, and shall desire to
die and death flee from them.

7 [9:7]And the forms of the locusts were like horses prepared for
battle, and upon their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and
their faces were like the faces of men, [9:8]and they had hair like the
hair of women, and their teeth were like [those] of lions, [9:9]and
they had cuirasses like steel cuirasses, and the sound of their wings
was like the sound of chariots with many horses running to battle.
[9:10]And they had tails like scorpions and stings, and in their tails
was their power to injure men five months. [9:11]They had over them a
king, an angel of the abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, but in
the Greek he is called Apollyon. [9:12]One woe has passed; behold,
there come yet two woes after this.

8 [9:13]And the sixth angel sounded; and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar before God, [9:14]saying to the sixth angel
who had the trumpet, Unbind the four angels bound by the river, the
great Euphrates. [9:15] And the four angels were unbound, who were
prepared for the hour, and day, and month, and year, to kill a third
part of men. [9:16]And the number of the armies of the horse was two
ten thousands of ten thousands; I heard the number of them. [9:17]And
thus I saw the horses in the vision and those sitting on them, having
cuirassess of fire, of hyacinth and of sulphur; and the heads of the
horses were like the heads of lions, and from their mouths proceeded
fire and smoke and sulphur.

9 [9:18]By these three plagues a third part of men were killed, by the
fire and the smoke and the sulphur which proceeded from their mouths.
[9:19]For the power of the horses was in their mouths and in their
tails; for their tails were like serpents, having heads, and with them
they did injury. [9:20]And the rest of men, who were not killed with
these plagues, did not change their minds [to turn] from the works of
their hands, not to worship demons and idols of gold and silver and
brass and stone and wood, which cannot see nor hear nor walk, [9:21]
and did not change their minds [to turn] from their murders, nor from
their magic arts, nor from their fornication, nor from their thefts.




