CHAPTER VI. THE LITTLE BOOK AND THE TWO WITNESSES.


1 [10:1]AND I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud, and an iris was about his head, and his face was like the
sun, and his feet like pillars of fire, [10:2]and he had in his hand a
little book opened. And he set his right foot on the sea, and his left
on the land, [10:3]and cried with a loud voice, as a lion roars. And
when he cried, seven thunders spoke their words. [10:4]And when the
seven thunders spoke, I was about to write; and I heard a voice from
heaven, saying, Seal up what the seven thunders spoke, and write it not.

2 [10:5]And the angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land,
lifted up his right hand to heaven, [10:6]and swore by him that lives
forever and ever, that created heaven and the things in it and the
earth and the things in it and the sea and the things in it, that time
should be no longer, [10:7]but in the days of the sounding of the
seventh angel, when he is about to sound, then the mystery of God shall
be finished, as he told his servants the prophets.

3 [10:8]And the voice which I heard from heaven [I heard] again speak
to me and say, Go and take the little opened book in the hand of the
angel who stands on the sea and on the land.  [10:9]And I went to the
angel, and said to him, Give me the little book. And he said to me,
Take and eat it, and it will embitter your stomach, but in your mouth
it will be sweet as honey. [10:10]And I took the little book from the
hand of the angel and eat it; and it was in my mouth as sweet as honey;
and when I eat it, my stomach was bitter. [10:11]And they said to me,
You must prophesy again before peoples and nations and tongues and many
kings.

4 [11:1]And a rod was given me like a staff, and he said, Arise and
measure the temple of God and the altar and those that worship in it.
[11:2]And leave out the exterior court of the temple and measure it
not, for it has been given to the gentiles, and they shall tread the
holy city under foot forty-two months [three years and a half].
[11:3]And I will give charge to my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesy twelve hundred and sixty days [three years and a half] clothed
with sackcloth. [11:4]These are the two olive trees, and the two lamps,
which stand before the Lord of the earth. [11:5]And if any one will
injure them, fire proceeds from their mouth and devours their
adversaries; and if any one will injure them, he must thus be killed.
[11:6]These have power to shut heaven, that it may not rain in the days
of their prophecy, and they have power over the waters to turn them
into blood and to smite the earth with every plague as often as they
will.

5 [11:7]And when they shall finish their testimony, the beast which
ascends from the abyss shall make war with them, and conquer them, and
kill them. [11:8] And their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the
great city, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also
their Lord was crucified. [11:9] And the peoples and tribes and tongues
and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and a half, and
shall not permit their dead bodies to be buried. [11:10]And those that
dwell on the earth shall be glad, and rejoice over them, and shall send
gifts one to another, because these two prophets tormented those that
dwell on the earth. [11:11]And after three days and a half the spirit
of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet, and
great fear fell on those that saw them.  [11:12]And I heard a loud
voice from heaven saying to them, Ascend hither; and they ascended to
heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them. [11:13]And in that
hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth part of the city fell,
and seven thousand men were killed by the earthquake, and the rest were
terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven. [11:14]The second woe
has passed; behold, the third woe comes quickly.




