CHAPTER VII. THE SEVENTH TRUMPET, THE WOMAN, THE DRAGON AND THE BEASTS.


1 [11:15]AND the seventh angel sounded; and there were loud voices in
heaven, saying, the kingdom of the world has become our Lord's and his
Christ's, and he shall reign forever and ever.  [11:16]And the
twenty-four elders who sit before God on their thrones fell on their
faces, and worshipped God, [11:17]saying, We thank thee, Lord God
Almighty, the Is and the Was, that thou didst take thy great power and
reign, [11:18]and the nations were angry, and thy wrath came, and the
time of the dead to be judged and to give the reward to thy servants
the prophets and to the saints and those that fear thy name, small and
great, and to destroy those that destroy the earth.

2 [11:19]And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and the ark of his
covenant appeared in his temple, and there were lightnings and voices
and thunders and great hail.

3 [12:1]And a great symbol appeared in heaven, a woman clothed with the
sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
stars, [12:2]and being with child she cried out in pain and distress to
give it birth. [12:3]And there appeared another symbol in heaven, and
behold, a great fiery dragon, having seven heads and ten horns and upon
his heads seven diadems, [12:4]and his tail drew a third of the stars
of heaven, and cast them on the earth. And the dragon stood before the
woman who was about to bear [a child], that when she had borne he might
devour her son. [12:5]And she bore a male child, who is about to rule
all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up to God, and
to his throne. [12:6]And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she
has a place prepared by God, that they may nourish her there twelve
hundred and sixty days [three years and a half].

4 [12:7]And there was a war in heaven, Michael and his angels fighting
with the dragon. And the dragon fought and his angels, [12:8]and were
not strong, neither was their place found any longer in heaven.
[12:9]And the great dragon, the old serpent, who is called the devil
and Satan, and who deceives all the world, was cast to the earth, and
his angels were cast [to the earth] with him. [12:10]And I heard a loud
voice in heaven saying, Now has come the salvation and power and
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser of the
brothers, that accused them day and night before God, has been cast [to
the earth]. [12:11]And they conquered him by the blood of the Lamb and
by the word of their testimony, and exposed their lives to death.
[12:12]Therefore rejoice, heavens, and those who dwell in them; woe to
the earth and the sea, for the devil has come down to you, having great
anger, knowing that he has a short time.

5 [12:13]And when the dragon saw that he was cast to the earth, he
persecuted the woman who bore the male child. [12:14]And there were
given to the woman two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly to
the wilderness to her place, where she is nourished a time and times
and half a time [three years and a half], from before the serpent.
[12:15]And the serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman water like
a river, that he might carry her away.  [12:16]And the earth helped the
woman, and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the river which
the dragon cast out of his mouth. [12:17]And the dragon was angry with
the woman, and went to make war with the rest of her children who keep
the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus.

6 [13:1]And I stood on the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast come up
out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and upon his horns
ten diadems, and upon his heads names of blasphemy. [13:2]And the beast
which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet like those of a bear, and
his mouth like the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave him his power
and his throne and great authority. [13:3]And one of his heads [was as
if] mortally wounded, and its mortal wound was healed. And all the
earth wondered after the beast, [13:4]and they worshipped the dragon,
because he gave power to the beast, and worshipped the beast, saying,
Who is like the beast, and who is able to make war with him? [13:5]And
there was given him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemy, and
power was given him to continue forty-two months [three years and a
half]. [13:6]And he opened his mouth in blasphemies against God, to
blaspheme his name and his tabernacle and those that dwell in heaven.
[13:7]And it was given him to make war with the saints and to conquer
them, and power was given him over every tribe and people and tongue
and nation. [13:8]And all who dwell on the earth shall worship him,
[every one] whose name is not enrolled in the Lamb's book of life who
was killed from the foundation of the world. [13:9]If any one has an
ear let him hear. [13:10]If any one [leads] into captivity, he shall go
into captivity; if any one kills with the sword, he shall be killed
with the sword. Here is the patience and faith of the saints.

7 [13:11]And I saw another beast come up out of the earth, and he had
two horns like a lamb and spoke like a dragon. [13:12]And he exercised
all the power of the first beast in his presence. And he caused the
earth and those that dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose
mortal wound was healed. [13:13]And he performs great miracles, so as
even to make fire come down from heaven to the earth in the sight of
men. [13:14]And he deceives those that dwell on the earth by the
miracles which it was given him to perform before the beast, telling
those that dwell on the earth to make an image of the beast which had
the wound with the sword and lived. [13:15]And it was given him to give
a spirit to the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should
both speak, and cause that all who would not worship the image of the
beast should be killed. [13:16] And he caused all, small and great, and
rich and poor, and freemen and servants, to receive the mark on their
right hand or on their forehead, [13:17]and that no one should buy or
sell unless he had the mark, the name of the beast or the number of his
name. [13:18]Here is wisdom.  Let him that has a mind count the number
of the beast; for the number is man's. And his number is six hundred
and sixty-six.




