CHAPTER VIII. THE LAMB ON MOUNT ZION, AND HIS JUDGMENTS.


1 [14:1]AND I saw, and behold, the Lamb stood on Mount Zion, and with
him a hundred and forty-four thousand having his name and the name of
his father written on their foreheads. [14:2]And I heard a voice from
heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud
thunder, and the voice which I heard was like harpers playing on their
harps. [14:3]And they sung a new song before the throne and before the
four cherubs and the elders; and no one could learn the song except the
hundred and forty-four thousand, who had been redeemed from the earth.
[14:4]These are they who were not defiled with women; for they are
virgins; these are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These
were redeemed from men a first fruit to God and the Lamb, [14:5]and in
their mouth was found no deceit; for they are blameless.

2 [14:6]And I saw another angel flying in mid-heaven, having the
eternal gospel to preach to those who dwell on the earth and to every
nation and tribe and tongue and people, [14:7]saying with a loud voice,
Fear God and give him glory, for the hour of his judgment has come, and
worship him that made heaven and the earth and the sea and fountains of
waters.

3 [14:8]And another, a second angel, followed, saying, Babylon the
great has fallen, who made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath
of her fornication.

4 [14:9]And another, a third angel, followed them, saying with a loud
voice, if any one worships the beast and his image, and receives the
mark on his forehead or on his hand, [14:10]he shall drink of the wine
of the wrath of God, mingled undiluted in the cup of his indignation,
and he shall be tormented with fire and sulphur before the angels and
before the Lamb. [14:11]And the smoke of their torment rises up forever
and ever, and they have no rest day nor night who worship the beast and
his image, and whoever receives the mark of his name. [14:12]Here is
the patience of the saints, who keep the commandments of God and the
faith of Jesus. [14:13]And I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Write,
Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth.  Yes, says
the Spirit, they shall rest from their labors; and their works follow
after them.

5 [14:14]And I saw, and behold, a white cloud, and on the cloud one
sitting like the Son of man, having on his head a crown of gold and in
his hand a sharp sickle. [14:15]And another angel came out of the
temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Send
your sickle and reap, for the time has come to harvest, for the harvest
of the earth is dry. [14:16]And he that sat on the cloud cast his
sickle upon the earth, and the earth was harvested.

6 [14:17]And another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he had
a sharp sickle; [14:18]and another angel came out from the altar, who
had power over fire, and cried with a loud voice to him who had the
sharp sickle, saying, Send your sharp sickle and gather the grapes of
the vine of the earth, for its grapes are ripe. [14:19]And the angel
cast his sharp sickle on the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth
and cast it into the great wine-press of the wrath of God. [14:20]And
the wine-press was trodden without the city, and the blood went out
from the wine-press to the horses' bridles, a distance of sixteen
hundred stadia [158 English miles].




