CHAPTER IX. HE LAST SEVEN PLAGUES OF THE KINGDOM OF THE BEAST.


1 [15:1]AND I saw another symbol in heaven, great and wonderful, seven
angels having the last seven plagues, because by them the wrath of God
was finished. [15:2]And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with
fire, and those becoming victors over the beast and his image and the
number of his name standing on the sea of glass, having harps of God.
[15:3]And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God and the song
of the Lamb, saying, Great and wonderful are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, king of the nations; [15:4]who
shall not fear thee, Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou only art
holy, for all the nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
righteous ordinances have been made manifest.

2 [15:5]And after this I saw, and the temple of the tabernacle of the
testimony was opened in heaven, [the inner temple], [15:6]and the seven
angels went out who have the last seven plagues, clothed with pure
bright linen, and girded about the breasts with golden girdles.
[15:7]And one of the four cherubs gave the seven angels seven golden
bowls full of the wrath of the God who lives forever and ever.
[15:8]And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and
from his power, and no one could enter into the temple till the seven
plagues of the seven angels were finished.

3 [16:1]And I heard a loud voice saying to the seven angels, Go, pour
out the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth.  [16:2]And the
first went and poured out his bowl on the earth; and there was an evil
and malignant ulcer on the men who have the mark of the beast and those
who worship his image.

4 [16:3]And the second poured out his bowl on the sea; and it became as
the blood of a dead body, and every living soul died, the [creatures]
in the sea.

5 [16:4]And the third poured out his bowl on the rivers and the
fountains of waters; and they became blood. [16:5]And I heard the angel
of the waters say, Thou art just, the Is and the Was, [the] Holy One,
because thou hast judged thus, [16:6]for they shed the blood of saints
and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; they are worthy.
[16:7]And I heard the altar say, Yes, Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments.

6 [16:8]And the fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was given
it to scorch men with fire. [16:9]And men were scorched with great
heat, and blasphemed the name of God who had power over these plagues,
and changed not their minds to give him glory.

7 [16:10]And the fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast;
and his kingdom was darkened, and they gnawed their tongues from
painful labor, [16:11] and blasphemed the God of heaven on account of
their painful labors and their ulcers, and they changed not their minds
to turn from their works.

8 [16:12]And the sixth poured out his bowl on the river, the great
Euphrates; and its water was dried up, that the way of the kings from
the East might be prepared. [16:13]And I saw three impure spirits like
frogs [proceed] from the mouth of the dragon and from the mouth of the
beast and from the mouth of the false prophet;-- [16:14]for [these] are
spirits of demons that perform miracles, that go to the kings of all
the world, to assemble them for the battle of that great day of God
Almighty. [16:15]Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he that watches
and keeps on his clothes, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.
[16:16]And they assembled them in the place called in Hebrew Armagedon.

9 [16:17]And the seventh angel poured out his bowl on the air; and
there came out a loud voice from the temple, from the throne, saying,
It is done. [16:18] And there were lightnings and voices and thunders,
and there was a great earthquake, such as has not been since a man was
on the earth, such an earthquake and one so great. [16:19]And the great
city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell.
And Babylon the great was remembered before God, to give her the cup of
the wine of his indignant wrath. [16:20]And every island fled, and the
mountains were not found. [16:21]And great hail of about the weight of
a talent [the Attic talent, 56 pounds, the Jewish, 113] came down from
heaven upon men; and men blasphemed God on account of the plague of the
hail because its plague was very great.




