CHAPTER X. THE FALL OF BABYLON.


1 [17:1]AND one of the seven angels having the seven bowls came and
spoke to me, saying, Come, I will show you the judgment of the great
harlot who sits on many waters, [17:2]with whom the kings of the earth
have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth were made
drunk with the wine of her fornication.

2 [17:3]And he bore me away into the wilderness in the Spirit.  And I
saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast, [the beast] full of blasphemous
names, having seven heads and ten horns. [17:4]And the woman was
clothed in purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious
stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations
and the impurities of the fornication of the earth, [17:5]and on her
forehead the names inscribed, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF
HARLOTS AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. [17:6]And I saw the woman
drunk with the blood of the saints and the blood of the martyrs of
Jesus, and I wondered when I saw her with great wonder.

3 [17:7]And the angel said to me, Why did you wonder? I will tell you
the mystery of the woman and of the beast which carries her, having the
seven heads and ten horns. [17:8]The beast which you saw was and is
not, and is about to come up from the abyss, and goes to destruction;
and those who live on the earth, whose names are not written in the
book of life from the foundation of the world, will wonder, when they
see the beast that he was and is not and is to come. [17:9]Here is the
mind which has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which
the woman sits, [17:10]and are seven kings; five have fallen, one is,
the other has not yet come, and when he comes must continue a short
time.  [17:11]And the beast which was and is not, he also is the
eighth, and is of the seven, and goes to destruction.

4 [17:12]And the ten horns which you saw are ten kings, which have not
yet received a kingdom, but receive power as kings one hour with the
beast. [17:13] These have one will, and give their power and their
authority to the beast. [17:14]They shall make war with the Lamb, and
the Lamb shall conquer them,--for he is Lord of lords and King of
kings, and those with him are called and chosen and faithful.
[17:15]And he said to me, The waters which you saw, where the harlot
sits, are peoples and multitudes and nations and tongues. [17:16]And
the ten horns which you saw and the beast shall hate the harlot, and
make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire;
[17:17]for God has put it into their hearts to do his will and to have
one will and give their kingdom to the beast, till the words of God are
finished. [17:18]And the woman which you saw is the great city which
reigns over the kings of the earth.

5 [18:1]After this I saw another angel come down from heaven, having
great power, and the earth was lighted by his glory.  [18:2]And he
cried with a loud voice, saving, Babylon the great has fallen, has
fallen, and has become a habitation of demons, and a haunt of every
impure spirit, and a haunt of every impure and hateful bird,
[18:3]because all nations have drank of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the kings of the earth committed fornication with her,
and the merchants of the earth became rich from the greatness of her
luxury.

6 [18:4]And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her,
my people, that you may not partake of her sins, and receive of her
plagues; [18:5] for her sins have reached to heaven and God has
remembered her wickedness. [18:6]Render to her as she rendered to you,
and repay her double according to her works; of the cup that she has
mixed, mix to her double; [18:7]as much as she glorified herself, and
lived luxuriously, so much distress and sorrow give her. For she says
in her mind, I sit a queen and am not a widow and I see not sorrow.
[18:8]Therefore in one day shall her plagues come, death and sorrow and
famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for mighty is the Lord God
who has judged her.

7 [18:9]And the kings of the earth who committed fornication and lived
luxuriously with her shall weep and lament for her, when they see the
smoke of her burning, [18:10]standing at a distance on account of fear
of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, the great city, Babylon the mighty
city, for in one hour your judgment has come. [18:11]And the merchants
of the earth shall weep and lament for her, because no one buys their
wares any more, [18:12]wares of gold and silver and precious stones and
pearls, and linen and purple and silk and scarlet, and all thyine wood,
and every implement of ivory and every implement of most precious wood,
of brass and iron and marble, [18:13]cinnamon and amomum and incense
and ointment and frankincense, and wine and oil and fine flour and
wheat and cattle and sheep, and of horses and chariots and servants,
and souls of men. [18:14]And the fruit of your soul's desire has gone
from you, and all precious and shining stores have perished from you,
and you shall find them no more.

8 [18:15]And dealers in these things, and those who became rich by her,
shall stand afar off for fear of her distress, weeping and lamenting,
[18:16]saying, Alas, alas, the great city, that was clothed with fine
linen and purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious stones
and pearls, [18:17]for in one hour are so great riches made a
desolation. And every sailing-master and every one who sails to the
place, and sailors and all that work on the sea, shall stand afar off,
[18:18]and looking on the smoke of its burning, cry, saying, What city
is like this great city? [18:19]And they shall cast dust on their
heads, and cry weeping and lamenting, saying, Alas, alas, the great
city, by which all were enriched who had ships on the sea on account of
her costly merchandise, for in one hour is it made desolate.
[18:20]Rejoice over her, heaven, and you holy angels and apostles and
prophets, for God has executed your judgment on her.

9 [18:21]And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall Babylon the
great city be cast down, and shall be found no more. [18:22]And the
voice of harpers and singers and of those that play on flutes and
trumpets shall be heard in you no more.  And no artisan of any art
shall be found in you any more, and the sound of a mill shall be heard
in you no more, [18:23]and the light of a candle shall shine in you no
more, and the voice of a bridegroom and of a bride shall be heard in
you no more, for your merchants were the great ones of the earth, for
all nations were deceived by your magic arts, [18:24]and in her was
found the blood of prophets and saints, and of all that have been
killed on the earth.




