CHAPTER XI. SATAN CONQUERED AND IMPRISONED, HIS RELEASE AND FINAL OVERTHROW.


1 [19:1]AFTER this I heard a loud voice as of a great multitude in
heaven, saying, Halleluia, the salvation and glory and power of our
God, [19:2]for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged
the great harlot who destroyed the earth with her fornication, and
avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.  [19:3]And again they
said, Halleluia, and her smoke ascends forever and ever. [19:4]And the
twenty-four elders fell down, and the four cherubs, and worshipped God
who sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Halleluia. [19:5]And a voice came
out from the throne, saying, Praise our God, all his servants and those
that fear him, small and great. [19:6]And I heard them as the voice of
a great multitude, and as the sound of many waters and as the sound of
mighty thunders, saying, Halleluia, for the Lord our God the Almighty
reigns. [19:7]Let us rejoice and be glad, and give glory to him, for
the marriage of the Lamb has come and his wife has prepared herself,
[19:8]and it was given her to be arrayed in fine linen white and
clean;--for fine linen represents the righteous ordinances of the
saints.

2 [19:9]And he said to me, Write, Blessed are those who are called to
the wedding supper of the Lamb. And he told me, These are the true
words of God. [19:10]And I fell before his feet to worship him. And he
said to me, See [that you do it] not; I am your fellow-servant and of
your brothers who have the testimony of Jesus; worship God. For the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

3 [19:11]And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he
that sat on it is called faithful and true, and in righteousness he
judges and makes war. [19:12]And his eyes are a flame of fire, and on
his head are many diadems; he has a name written that no man knows
except himself, [19:13]and he is clothed in a mantle dipped in blood,
and his name is called The Word of God. [19:14]And the armies of heaven
follow him upon white horses, clothed with fine white clean linen.
[19:15]And out of his mouth proceeds a sharp sword, that with it he may
smite the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he
shall tread the wine-press of the indignant wrath of God Almighty.
[19:16]And he has on the mantle and on the thigh his name written, King
of kings and Lord of lords.

4 [19:17]And I saw an angel standing on the sun, and he cried with a
loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in mid-heaven, Come,
assemble yourselves to the great supper of God, [19:18]that you may eat
the flesh of kings and the flesh of chiliarchs and the flesh of mighty
[men] and the flesh of horses and of those who sit on them, and the
flesh of all, both free-men and servants and both small and great.
[19:19]And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies
assembled together to make war with him that sat on the horse and with
his army.  [19:20]And the beast was taken and with him the false
prophet who performed miracles before him, with which he deceived those
who received the mark of the beast and those who worship his image; and
the two were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with sulphur.
[19:21]And the rest were killed with the sword of him that sits on the
horse, which proceeded out of his mouth, and all the birds were filled
with their flesh.

5 [20:1]And I saw an angel descending from heaven, having the key of
the abyss and a great chain in his hand. [20:2]And he took the dragon,
which is the old serpent, who is the devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years, [20:3]and cast him into the abyss, and shut him up and
put a seal over him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till
the thousand years were finished; after that he must be released a
short time.

6 [20:4]And I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment was given
them, and the souls of those who have been beheaded for the testimony
of Jesus and the word of God, and who did not worship the beast nor his
image and did not receive the mark on their forehead and on their right
hand; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years;
[20:5]the rest of the dead did not live till the thousand years were
finished. This is the first resurrection. [20:6]Blessed and holy is he
that has part in the first resurrection; on these the second death has
no power, but they shall be priests of God and Christ, and reign with
him a thousand years.

7 [20:7]And when the thousand years are finished, Satan shall be
released from his prison, [20:8]and go forth to deceive the nations
which are in the four quarters of the earth, the Gog and the Magog [the
king and the people], and to assemble them together to battle, whose
number is as the sand of the sea.  [20:9] And they went up on the
breadth of the earth, and surrounded the encampment of the saints and
the beloved city; and fire came down from heaven and consumed them.
[20:10]And the devil who deceived them was cast into the lake of fire
and sulphur, where also the beast and the false prophet [were cast],
and they shall be tormented day and night forever and ever.




