CHAPTER XIX. CHRIST QUESTIONED BY THE CHIEF PRIESTS AND ELDERS. THE PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD.


1 [21:23]AND Jesus having gone into the temple, the chief priests and
elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, By what
authority do you do these things? and who gave you this authority?
[21:24]Jesus answered and said to them, I also will ask you one
question, which, if you tell me, I will tell you by what authority I do
these things. [21:25]Whence was the baptism of John? from heaven or
from men? And they reasoned within themselves, saying, If we say from
heaven, he will say to us, Why did you not believe him? [21:26]But if
we say from men, we fear the multitude, for all regard John as a
prophet. [21:27] And they answered Jesus, and said, We do not know. And
he said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these
things.

2 [21:28]But what do you think? A man had two sons; and he went to the
first, and said, Son, go and work to-day in the vineyard.  [21:29]But
he answered and said, I will not; but afterwards he repented, and went.
[21:30]And he came to the other, and said the same. And he answered and
said, I will go sir, but went not.  [21:31]Which of the two did the
will of the father? They said to him, The first. Jesus said to them, I
tell you truly, that the publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of
God before you.  [21:32]For John came to you in a way of righteousness,
and you believed him not; but the publicans and harlots believed him;
and when you saw this, you did not afterwards repent, that you might
believe him.

3 [21:33]Hear another parable: There was a man, a householder, who
planted a vineyard, and made a hedge around it, and dug a wine vat in
it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad.
[21:34]And when the time of the fruits approached he sent his servants
to the husbandmen to receive his fruits. [21:35]And the husbandmen took
his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
[21:36]Again he sent other servants more than the first; and they
treated them in the same manner. [21:37]And afterwards he sent them his
son, saying, They will reverence my son. [21:38]But when the husbandmen
saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us
kill him and take his inheritance. [21:39]And they took him, and cast
him out of the vineyard, and killed him. [21:40]When, therefore, the
lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those husbandmen?
[21:41]They said to him, He will inflict on those men a miserable
death, and let out his vineyard to other husbandmen, who will render
him the fruits in their seasons.

4 [21:42]Jesus said to them, Have you never read in the Scriptures, The
stone which the builders rejected, the same has become the head of a
corner? this is from the Lord, and is wonderful in our eyes? [21:43]I
tell you, therefore, that the kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given to a nation yielding its fruits.

5 [21:45]And the chief priests and Pharisees hearing his parables, knew
that he spoke of them; [21:46]and they sought to take him, but feared
the people, because they regarded him as a prophet.




