CHAPTER XII. THE FINAL JUDGMENT, THE NEW JERUSALEM, ETC.


1 [20:11]AND I saw a great white throne and him that sat on it, from
whose presence the earth and heaven fled away, and no place was found
for them. [20:12]And I saw the dead, great and small, stand before the
throne, and the books were opened; and another book was opened, which
is of life. And the dead were judged from the things written in the
books according to their works.  [20:13]And the sea gave up the dead
who were in it, and Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them,
and they were judged each according to their works. [20:14]And Death
and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death,
the lake of fire. [20:15]And whoever was not found enrolled in the book
of life was cast into the lake of fire.

2 [21:1]And I saw a new heaven and new earth; for the first heaven and
the first earth passed away, and the sea was no more.  [21:2]And I saw
the holy city New Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.  [21:3]And I heard a loud
voice from heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will tabernacle with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself will be with them, their God, [21:4]and he will wipe away every
tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor shall lamentation
nor crying nor pain be any more, for the former things have passed away.

3 [21:5]And he that sits on the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And he said, Write that these words are faithful and true.
[21:6]And he said to me, It is done. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the
beginning and the end. I will give to him that thirsts of the fountain
of the water of life freely. [21:7]He that conquers shall inherit these
things, and I will be to him a God and he shall be to me a son.
[21:8]But the fearful and unbelieving and abominable and murderers and
fornicators and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and sulphur, which is the second
death.

4 [21:9]And one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the
last seven plagues came, and spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show
you the wife, the bride of the Lamb. [21:10]And he bore me away in the
Spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me the city, the holy
Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, [21:11]having the glory
of God; its luminary was like the most precious stone, like a
crystalline jasper. [21:12]It had a great and high wall, it had twelve
gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are
the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel. [21:13]On the
east were three gates, and on the north three gates, and on the south
three gates, and on the west three gates. [21:14]And the wall of the
city has twelve foundations, and on them the twelve names of the twelve
apostles of the Lamb.

5 [21:15]And he that spoke with me had a golden measuring rod, to
measure the city and its gates and its wall. [21:16]And the city was
square, and its length equal to its breadth. And he measured the city
with the rod, twelve thousand stadia [1372 English miles]; and the
length and breadth and height of it are equal.  [21:17]And he measured
its wall, a hundred and forty-four cubits, the measure of a man, which
was of the angel. [21:18]And the building of its wall was jasper, and
the city was of pure gold like clear glass. [21:19]And the foundations
of the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone; the
first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony,
the fourth emerald, [21:20]the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardine stone,
the seventh chrysolyte, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth
chrysoprase, the eleventh hyacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.

6 [21:21]And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; each of the gates was
of one pearl. And the street of the city was of pure gold, transparent
as glass. [21:22]And I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty
is its temple, and the Lamb. [21:23]And the city has no need of the
sun, nor of the moon, to give a light to it; for the glory of God
lights it, and its light the Lamb.  [21:24] And the nations shall walk
in its light, and the kings of the earth bring their glory to it,
[21:25]and its gates shall not be shut by day,--for there shall be no
night there,-- [21:26]and they shall bring the glory and honor of the
nations into it.  [21:27]And there shall not enter into it any thing
that is defiled, nor any one that commits an abomination and falsehood,
but those enrolled in the Lamb's book of life.

7 [22:1]And he showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding from the throne of God and the Lamb. [22:2]In the midst of
its broad plain and along the river on each side was the tree of life,
bearing twelve fruits, and yielding monthly each of its fruits, and the
leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. [22:3]And no
curse shall be there any more. And the throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him, [22:4]and shall see
his face, and his name shall be on their foreheads. [22:5] And there
shall be no night, and they shall have no need of a lamp and light, for
the Lord God shall shed light on them, and they shall reign forever and
ever.

8 [22:6]And he said to me, These words are faithful and true, and the
Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to show his
servants what must shortly occur. [22:7]Behold, I come quickly. Blessed
is he that keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.

9 [22:8]And I am John who heard and saw these thing; and when I heard
and when I saw I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel that
showed me these things. [22:9]And he said to me, See [that you do it]
not; for I am your fellow servant and of your brothers the prophets and
of those that keep the words of this book; worship God. [22:10]And he
said to me, Seal not up the words of the prophecy of this book; the
time is at hand.  [22:11]Let the unjust be unjust still, and let the
filthy be filthy still, and let the righteous do righteousness still,
and let the holy be made holy still.

10 [22:12]Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give
every one as his work is. [22:13]I am the Alpha and the Omega, first
and last, the beginning and end. [22:14]Blessed are they that keep his
commandments, that they may have a right to the tree of life, and enter
by the gates into the city.  [22:15]Without are dogs and sorcerers, and
fornicators, and murderers and idolaters and whoever loves and
practises falsehood.

11 [22:16]I Jesus sent my angel to testify to you these things for the
churches. I am the root and offspring of David, and the bright star of
the morning. [22:17]And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him
that hears say, Come. And let him that thirsts, come; let him that
will, take the water of life freely.

12 [22:18]I testify to every one that hears the words of the prophecy
of this book. If any one adds to them, God shall add to him the plagues
written in this book; [22:19]and if any one takes away from the words
of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part from the
tree of life, and the holy city, described in this book. [22:20]He that
testifies these things says, Yes, I come quickly. Amen, come Lord
Jesus. [22:21]The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.




