CHAPTER II. THE INFANCY OF CHRIST.


1 [2:1]AND Jesus being born in Bethlehem in Judea, in the days of Herod
the king, behold Magi came from the East to Jerusalem, saying,
[2:2]Where is the king of the Jews born? For we have seen his star in
the East, and have come to worship him. [2:3]And Herod the king hearing
this was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him; [2:4]and assembling all
the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where
the Christ is born. [2:5]And they said to him, In Bethlehem of Judea;
for thus it is written by the prophet; [2:6]And you Bethlehem, land of
Judah, are by no means least among the governors of Judah, for out of
you shall come a governor who shall rule my people Israel.

2 [2:7]Then Herod, calling the Magi secretly, asked them the precise
time when the star appeared; [2:8]and sending them to Bethlehem, said,
Go and inquire diligently for the young child, and when you have found
him, tell me, that I also may come and worship him. [2:9]And hearing
the king, they departed; and behold, the star which they saw in the
East went before them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was. [2:10]And seeing the star they rejoiced with great joy;
[2:11]and coming into the house they saw the young child with Mary his
mother; and they fell down and worshipped him; and opening their
treasures they presented him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
[2:12] And being divinely instructed in a dream not to return to Herod,
they departed to their country another way.

3 [2:13]And when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child
and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and remain there till I tell you;
for Herod will seek the young child to destroy it.  [2:14]And he arose
and took the young child and his mother by night, and fled into Egypt,
[2:15]and was there till the death of Herod; that the word might be
fulfilled, which the Lord spoke by the prophet, saying; Out of Egypt
have I called my son.

4 [2:16]Then Herod seeing that he was despised by the Magi, was
exceedingly angry, and sent and destroyed all the children in
Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from two years old and under,
according to the precise time which he had learned of the Magi.
[2:17]Thus was fulfilled the word spoken by Jeremiah the prophet,
saying; [2:18]A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and great
mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted
because they were not.

5 [2:19]And when Herod had died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared
to Joseph in a dream, in Egypt, saying, [2:20]Arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead
that sought the young child's life.  [2:21]And he arose and took the
young child and his mother, and went into the land of Israel. [2:22]But
hearing that Archelaus reigned over Judea in the place of Herod his
father, he was afraid to go there; but being divinely instructed in a
dream, he departed into the parts of Galilee, [2:23] and went and lived
in a city called Nazareth, that the word spoken by the prophets might
be fulfilled, He shall be called a Nazoraean.




