CHAPTER XX. THE PARABLE OF THE WEDDING, AND QUESTIONS OF THE PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES.


1 [22:1]AND Jesus answered and spoke to them again in parables saying,
[22:2] The kingdom of heaven is like a man, a king, who made a wedding
for his son. [22:3]And he sent his servants to call the invited to the
wedding, and they would not come.  [22:4]Again he sent other servants,
saying, Tell the invited, Behold, I have prepared my supper, my oxen
and fatted creatures are killed, and all things are ready; come to the
wedding.  [22:5]But they neglected it, and went away, one to his farm,
and another to his merchandise; [22:6]and the rest took his servants
and treated them injuriously, and killed them. [22:7]And the king was
angry, and sent his armies and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up
their city.

2 [22:8]Then he said to his servants, The wedding indeed is ready, but
the invited were not worthy. [22:9]Go, therefore, to the crossings of
the ways, and invite all you find to the wedding. [22:10]And those
servants went out into the highways, and collected all whom they found,
both bad and good, and the wedding was furnished with guests.

3 [22:11]And the king coming in to see the guests observed there a man
who had not on a wedding garment, [22:12]and said to him, Friend, how
came you in here not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.
[22:13]Then the king said to the servants, Bind his feet and hands, and
cast him into the darkness outside. There shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. [22:14]For many are called, but few chosen.

4 [22:15]Then the Pharisees went and took counsel to ensnare him in his
words. [22:16]And they sent to him their disciples, with the Herodians,
saying, Teacher, we know that you are true, and teach the way of God in
truth, and care not for any man; for you regard not the face of men.
[22:17]Tell us, therefore, what you think; is it right to pay tribute
to Caesar or not? [22:18]Jesus knowing their wickedness, said, Why do
you hypocrites try me?  [22:19]Show me the tribute money. And they
brought him a denarius [14 cents]. [22:20]And he said to them, Whose is
this image and this inscription? [22:21]They said to him, Caesar's.
Then he said to them, Give therefore Caesar's dues to Caesar, and God's
to God. [22:22]And hearing, they wondered, and went away and left him.

5 [22:23]On that day the Sadducees came to him, who say there is no
resurrection, and asked him, [22:24]saying, Teacher, Moses said, If any
one dies having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and
raise up children for his brother. [22:25]Now there were with us seven
brothers; and the first married, and died; and having no children he
left his wife to his brother; [22:26]in like manner also the second,
and third, till the seventh; [22:27] last of all the woman died also.
[22:28]In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife will she be of the
seven? for they all had her. [22:29]And Jesus answered and said to
them, You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
[22:30]For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are married, but
are as angels in heaven. [22:31]But concerning the resurrection of the
dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, saying, [22:32]I
am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God
is not a God of the dead, but of the living.  [22:33]And the multitudes
who heard were astonished at his teaching.

6 [22:34]And the Pharisees hearing that he had silenced the Sadducees,
were assembled together, [22:35]and one of them, a lawyer, asked him,
to try him, [22:36]Teacher, what is the great commandment in the law?
[22:37]And he said to him, You shall love the Lord your God with all
your heart, and all your soul, and all your mind. [22:38]This is the
great and first commandment.  [22:39]And the second is like it, You
shall love your neighbor as yourself. [22:40]On these two commandments
hang all the law and the prophets.

7 [22:41]And the Pharisees being assembled together, Jesus asked them,
[22:42] saying, What do you think of the Christ? whose son is he? They
said to him, David's. [22:43]He said to them, How then does David in
spirit call him Lord, saying, [22:44]The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on
my right hand till I make your enemies your footstool? [22:45]If then
David calls him Lord, how is he his son? [22:46]And no one was able to
answer him a word, neither dared any one after that day to question him
farther.




