CHAPTER XXI. CHRIST DENOUNCING THE SCRIBES AND PHARISEES.


1 [23:1]THEN Jesus spoke to the multitudes and his disciples,
[23:2]saying, The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat.  [23:3]All
things therefore which they tell you, do and keep. But do not their
works. For they say and do not, [23:4]but bind heavy burdens and put
them on the shoulders of men, but will not move them with their finger.
[23:5]And they do all their works to be seen by men. For they make
broad their prayer fillets, and enlarge the fringes, [23:6] and love
the first tables at feasts, and the first seats in the synagogues,
[23:7]and salutations in the markets, and to be called by men, Rabbi.
[23:8] But do not you be called Rabbi; For one is your teacher, and you
are all brothers. [23:9]And call no man your father on the earth, for
one is your heavenly Father. [23:10]Neither be called leaders, for one
is your leader, the Christ. [23:11]But the greatest of you shall be
your servant, [23:12]and whoever exalts himself shall be humbled, and
he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

2 [23:13]But woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you shut
up the kingdom of heaven before men; for you enter not into it, neither
do you suffer those entering to go in.  [23:15]Woe to you scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! For you compass the sea and the dry land to make
one proselyte; and when he is gained you make him twice as much a child
of hell as yourselves. [23:16]Woe to you blind guides, who say, Whoever
swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of
the temple, he is bound. [23:17]Fools and blind! for which is greater,
the gold, or the temple which sanctifies the gold? [23:18] If a man
swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if he swears by the gift which
is on it, he is bound. [23:19]Fools and blind! For which is greater,
the gift, or the altar which sanctifies the gift? [23:20]He then that
swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all things on it; [23:21]and
he that swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him that inhabits
it; [23:22]and he that swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God,
and by him that sits on it.

3 [23:23]Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe
mint, and anise, and cummin, and have neglected the weightier matters
of the law, justice, mercy, and faith. These you ought to do, and not
neglect the others. [23:24] Blind guides! who strain out a gnat and
swallow down a camel.  [23:25]Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you cleanse the outside of the cup and platter, but
within they are full of plunder and excess. [23:26]Blind Pharisee!
cleanse first that which is in the cup and platter, that its outside
may be clean also. [23:27]Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
For you are like whitewashed tombs, which appear fair without, but
within are full of the bones of the dead and of all impurity.
[23:28]So also you on the outside appear just to men, but within you
are full of hypocrisy and wickedness. [23:29]Woe to you scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and
adorn the tombs of the righteous, [23:30]and say, If we had been in the
days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the prophets. [23:31]So that you testify to yourselves that
you are children of those who killed the prophets; [23:32]and you have
filled up the measure of your fathers. [23:33]Serpents, offspring of
vipers! How can you escape the judgment of hell?

4 [23:34]Therefore, behold, I send you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify; and some of them you
will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city;
[23:35]that all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood
of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah, son of Bararchiah, whom
you killed between the temple and the altar, may come upon you.
[23:36]I tell you truly, that all these [crimes] shall come on this
generation.

5 [23:37]Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets, and stoning those
sent to you, how often would I have gathered your children together, as
a bird gathers her brood under her wings, but you would not!
[23:38]Behold, your house is left to you desolate; [23:39]for I tell
you that you shall not see me henceforth, till you say, Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord!




