CHAPTER XXII. CHRIST PREDICTING THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF HIS KINGDOM.


1 [24:1]AND Jesus went out and departed from the temple; and his
disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.
[24:2]And he answered and said to them, Do you not see all these
things? I tell you truly, there shall not be left here stone upon stone
that shall not be thrown down. [24:3]And as he sat on the Mount of
Olives the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us when these
things shall be; and what shall be the sign of your coming, and of the
consummation of the world? [24:4]And Jesus answered and said to them,
See that no man deceives you; [24:5]for many shall come in my name,
saying, I am the Christ, and shall deceive many. [24:6]And you shall
hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that you be not terrified, for all
things must be accomplished; but the end is not yet. [24:7]For nation
shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall
be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in different places;
[24:8]but all these things are the beginning of sorrows.

2 [24:9]Then they shall deliver you to affliction, and kill you, and
you shall be hated by all nations on my account; [24:10]and then many
shall be offended, and shall betray one another, and hate one another;
[24:11]and many false prophets shall be raised up and deceive many,
[24:12]and because wickedness shall abound the love of the many shall
become cold: [24:13]but he that endures to the end shall be saved.
[24:14]And this good news of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world, for a testimony to all nations; and then shall the end come.

3 [24:15]When, therefore, you see the abomination of desolation, spoken
of by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place--let him that reads
understand,-- [24:16]then let those in Judea flee to the mountains.
[24:17]Let not him that is on his house come down to take the things
from his house; [24:18]and let not him that is in the field return back
to take his clothes; [24:19]and woe to those with child and giving
nurse in those days!  [24:20]But pray that your flight may not be in
the winter, nor on the Sabbath; [24:21]for at that time there shall be
great affliction, such as has not been from the beginning of the world
even till now, nor ever shall be. [24:22]And unless those days were
shortened no flesh would be saved: but on account of the elect those
days shall be shortened.

4 [24:23]Then if one says to you, Behold, here is the Christ, or there!
believe it not. [24:24]For false Christs and false prophets shall be
raised up, and shall show great signs and wonders, so as to deceive, if
possible, even the elect.  [24:25]Behold, I have told you before.
[24:26]If, therefore, they say to you, Behold he is in the wilderness,
go not forth; Behold he is in private rooms, believe it not. [24:27]For
as the lightning comes forth from the East, and shines even to the
West, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. [24:28] Wherever the
dead body is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

5 [24:29]And immediately after the affliction of those days the sun
shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
[24:30]And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven; and
then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn; and they shall see the
Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
[24:31]And he shall send his angels with a loud sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather his elect from the four winds, from the one end of
heaven to the other.

6 [24:32]But learn the parable of the fig tree. When its branch is now
green, and puts forth leaves, you know that the summer is nigh.
[24:33]So also when you see all these things, know that [the Son of
man] is nigh, at the doors. [24:34]I tell you truly, that this
generation shall not pass away till all these things shall be
accomplished. [24:35]Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words
shall not pass away.

7 [24:36]But of that day and hour no man knows, nor the angels of
heaven; but my Father only. [24:37]And as the days of Noah, so shall
the coming of the Son of man be. [24:38]For as in the days before the
flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
till the day that Noah entered the ark, [24:39]and knew not till the
flood came and took them all away, so shall the coming of the Son of
man be. [24:40]Then two shall be in the field; one is taken and the
other left. [24:41]Two women shall be grinding at the mill; one is
taken and the other left.

8 [24:42]Watch, therefore, for you know not on what day your Lord
comes, [24:43]But know this, that if the householder had known in what
watch the thief comes, he would have watched, and not have suffered his
house to be broken into. [24:44]Therefore be you also ready, for in
such an hour as you think not the Son of man comes. [24:45]Who then is
the faithful and wise servant whom the Lord has placed over his family
to give them food in due season?  [24:46]Blessed is that servant whom
his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. [24:47]I tell you truly,
that he will place him over all his estates.

9 [24:48]But if that evil servant says in his heart, My Lord delays his
coming, [24:49]and begins to beat his fellow-servants, and eats and
drinks with drunkards, [24:50]the Lord of that servant will come on a
day when he looks not for him, and at an hour that he knows not of,
[24:51]and will punish him with the utmost severity, and appoint his
portion with hypocrites. There shall be weeping and gnashing of the
teeth.

10 [25:1]Then the kingdom of heaven shall be likened to ten virgins who
took their own lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom; [25:2]and
five of them were foolish, and five wise.  [25:3]The foolish took their
lamps and took no oil with them; [25:4]but the wise took oil in the
vessels with their lamps.  [25:5] And while the bridegroom delayed, all
slumbered and slept; [25:6]but at midnight there was a cry, Behold the
bridegroom; go out to meet him. [25:7]Then all those virgins arose and
trimmed their own lamps. [25:8]And the foolish said to the wise, Give
us of your oil, for our lamps have gone out. [25:9]But the wise
answered, saying, [No]; lest there be not enough for us and you; go
rather to those that sell, and buy for yourselves. [25:10]And while
they went to buy the bridegroom came; and the ready went in with him to
the wedding, and the door was shut. [25:11]And afterwards the other
virgins came, and said, Lord, Lord, open to us. [25:12]But he answered
and said, I tell you truly I know you not. [25:13]Watch, therefore, for
you know not the day nor the hour.

11 [25:14]For, as a man going abroad called his servants, and delivered
to them his estates; [25:15]to one he gave five talents [$5,000], to
another two [$2,000], and to another one [$1,000]; to each according to
his ability, and immediately went abroad.  [25:16]And he that received
the five talents went and traded with them, and made other five;
[25:17]in like manner, also, he that received the two gained two
others; [25:18]but he that received the one went away and dug in the
earth and hid his lord's money.  [25:19]And after a long time the lord
of those servants came, and had a settlement with them. [25:20] And he
that received the five talents came and brought five other talents,
saying, Lord, you committed to me five talents; behold, I have gained
five other talents. [25:21]His lord said to him, Well done, good and
faithful servant; you have been faithful over a few [talents], I will
place you over many: enter into the joy of your lord.  [25:22]And he
that received the two talents also came to him and said, Lord, you
committed to me two talents; behold, I have gained two others.
[25:23]His Lord said to him, Well done, good and faithful servant; you
have been faithful over a few [talents], I will place you over many:
enter into the joy of your lord.

12 [25:24]And he that received the one talent also came and said, Lord,
I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping where you have not sowed,
and gathering where you have not scattered, [25:25]and being afraid I
went away and hid your talent in the earth; behold, you have what is
yours. [25:26]And his Lord answered and said to him, Evil and slothful
servant, you knew that I reap where I have not sowed, and gather whence
I have not scattered?  [25:27]And you ought then to have given my money
to the brokers, and at my coming, I should have received my own with
interest.  [25:28]Take his talent, therefore, from him, and give it to
him that has ten talents; [25:29]for to every one that has shall be
given, and he shall have an abundance; but from him that has not, even
what he has shall be taken away; [25:30]and cast the unprofitable
servant into the darkness outside; there shall be weeping and gnashing
of the teeth.

13 [25:31]But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory,
[25:32]and all the nations shall be assembled before him, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from
the goats; [25:33]and he shall place the sheep on his right hand, and
the goats on his left.

14 [25:34]Then shall the king say to those on his right hand, Come,
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world; [25:35]for I was hungry and you gave me food;
I was thirsty and you gave me drink; I was a stranger and you took me
in; [25:36]naked and you clothed me; I was sick and you visited me; I
was in prison, and you came to me.  [25:37]Then shall the righteous
answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you? or
thirsty, and give you drink? [25:38]when did we see you a stranger, and
take you in? or naked, and clothe you? [25:39]when did we see you sick,
or in prison, and come to you? [25:40]And the king shall answer and say
to them, I tell you truly, that inasmuch as you have done it to one of
the least of these my brothers, you have done it to me.

15 [25:41]Then shall he say to those on his left hand, Depart from me
accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
[25:42]For I was hungry and you gave me no food; I was thirsty and you
gave me no drink; [25:43] a stranger, and you took me not in; sick and
in prison and you visited me not.  [25:44]Then shall they also answer
and say, Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger,
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not serve you? [25:45]Then he
shall answer them saying, I tell you truly, that inasmuch as you have
not done it to one of the least of these my brothers, you have not done
it to me. [25:46]And these shall go away into eternal punishment, but
the righteous into life eternal.




