CHAPTER XXIII. CHRIST AT BETHANY, THE PASCHAL AND LORD'S SUPPER, ETC.


1 [26:1]WHEN Jesus had finished all these words he said to his
disciples, [26:2]You know that after two days is the passover, and the
Son of man is delivered up to be crucified. [26:3]Then the chief
priests and the elders of the people were assembled in the court of the
chief priest, who was called Caiaphas, [26:4]and they took counsel to
seize Jesus by stratagem, and kill him.  [26:5]But they said, Not at
the feast, lest there be a tumult among the people.

2 [26:6]And Jesus being at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
[26:7]a woman came to him having a vase of very costly ointment, and
poured it on his head, as he reclined. [26:8]And his disciples seeing
it were displeased, and said, Why is this waste? [26:9]This could have
been sold for much and given to the poor. [26:10]But Jesus knowing it,
said to them, Why do you trouble the woman? for she has done a good
work for me; [26:11]for the poor you always have with you, but me you
have not always. [26:12]For in putting this ointment on my body, she
has done it to prepare me for burial. [26:13]I tell you truly, that
wherever this good news is preached in all the word, what this woman
has done shall be told for a memorial of her.

3 [26:14]Then went one of the twelve called Judas Iscariot to the chief
priests, [26:15]and said, What will you give me to deliver him to you?
And they gave him thirty [shekels] of silver [$16.80]. [26:16]And from
that time he sought a good opportunity to deliver him up. [26:17]And on
the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying,
Where do you wish us to prepare for you to eat the passover? [26:18]And
he said, Go into the city to such a one, and say to him, The Teacher
says, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover with you, together
with my disciples. [26:19]And the disciples did as Jesus commanded
them, and prepared the passover; [26:20]and when it was evening he
reclined with the twelve. [26:21]And as they were eating, he said, I
tell you truly, that one of you will betray me.  [26:22]And being
grieved exceedingly, they each one began to say to him, Lord, is it I?
[26:23]But he answered and said, He that dips his hand with me in the
dish, he shall betray me. [26:24]The Son of man goes indeed, as it is
written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed!
it would be good for him if that man had not been born. [26:25]And
Judas, who betrayed him, answered and said, Is it I, Rabbi? He said to
him, As you say.

4 [26:26]And as they were eating Jesus took the bread, and having
blessed, broke and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is
my body. [26:27] And taking the cup, and giving thanks, he gave it to
them, saying, Drink you all of it; [26:28]this is my blood of the new
covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
[26:29]And I tell you that I will not drink henceforth of this product
of the vine, till that day when I drink it with you new in the kingdom
of my Father. [26:30]And having sung a hymn they went out to the Mount
of Olives.

5 [26:31]Then Jesus said to them, You will all be offended with me this
night; for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered; [26:32]but after I have risen I will go
before you into Galilee. [26:33]And Peter answered and said to him, If
all men shall be offended with you, I will not. [26:34]Jesus said to
him, I tell you truly, that this night, before the cock crows, you will
deny me thrice.  [26:35]Peter said to him, If it should be necessary
for me to die with you, I will by no means deny you. And all the
disciples said the same.




