CHAPTER XXIV. CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE, AND BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM.


1 [26:36]THEN Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane, and
said to the disciples, Sit here, till I go and pray there.  [26:37]And
taking Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and
dejected. [26:38]Then he said to them, My soul is sorrowful even to
death; remain here and watch with me.  [26:39]And going forward a
little, he fell on his face, and prayed and said, My Father, if it is
possible let this cup pass from me; but not as I will, but as thou
wilt. [26:40]And he came to the disciples and found them sleeping, and
said to Peter, Are you so unable to watch with me one hour?
[26:41]Watch and pray that you enter not into trial; the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

2 [26:42]Going away again a second time, he prayed, saying, My Father,
if this cup cannot pass from me unless I drink it, thy will be done.
[26:43]And he came and found them sleeping again, for their eyes were
heavy. [26:44]And leaving them, again he went away and prayed, saying
the same words. [26:45]Then he came to the disciples and said to them,
Do you sleep still and take your rest? Behold the hour is at hand, and
the Son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners. [26:46]Arise,
let us go; behold, he that betrays me is at hand.

3 [26:47]And while he was yet speaking, behold, Judas, one of the
twelve, came, and with him a great multitude, with swords and clubs,
from the chief priests and elders of the people.  [26:48]And he that
betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, The one that I shall kiss is he;
take him. [26:49]And immediately coming forward to Jesus, he said,
Hail, Rabbi, and kissed him.  [26:50]But Jesus said to him, Comrade,
for what have you come?  Then they came forward, and laid hands on
Jesus, and took him.  [26:51]And behold, one of those with Jesus,
stretching out his hand, drew his sword, and striking the servant of
the chief priest cut off his ear. [26:52]Then Jesus said to him, Put up
your sword in its place; for all who take the sword shall perish by the
sword. [26:53]Do you think that I could not ask my Father, and he would
furnish me more than twelve legions of angels?  [26:54]How then would
the Scriptures be accomplished, that it must be so?

4 [26:55]At that time Jesus said to the multitudes, Have you come out
as against a robber, with swords and clubs to take me? I sat daily
teaching in the temple, and you did not take me; [26:56]but all this
was done that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then the
disciples all forsook him and fled.  [26:57]And having taken Jesus,
they led him away to Caiaphas, the chief priest, where the scribes and
elders were assembled.  [26:58]But Peter followed him at a distance,
even to the court of the chief priest, and going in sat with the
officers to see the end.

5 [26:59]And the chief priests and all the sanhedrim sought false
testimony against Jesus to kill him, [26:60]and did not find it, though
many false witnesses came forward. But afterwards, two coming forward
[26:61]said, This man said, I can destroy the temple of God and build
it in three days. [26:62] And the chief priest rising up said to him,
Do you answer nothing? What do these testify against you? [26:63]But
Jesus was silent. And the chief priest answering, said to him, I adjure
you, by the living God, to tell me if you are the Christ, the Son of
God.  [26:64]Jesus said to him, As you say; but I tell you that
hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the
power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.

6 [26:65]Then the chief priest rent his clothes, saying, He has
blasphemed; what further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now you
have heard the blasphemy. [26:66]What do you think? And they answered
and said, He is worthy of death. [26:67]Then they spit in his face, and
struck him with their fists, and some struck him with the palms of
their hands, [26:68]saying, Prophesy to us, Christ, who is it that
struck you?

7 [26:69]But Peter sat without in the court; and a female servant came
to him, saying, You also were with Jesus the Galilean.  [26:70]But he
denied it before all, saying, I know not what you say. [26:71]And going
out into the porch, another [female servant] saw him, and said to those
there, This man was also with Jesus the Nazoraean. [26:72]And again he
denied with an oath, saying, I know not the man. [26:73]But after a
little while those standing by came forward, and said to Peter,
Certainly you are also one of them, for your speech makes you manifest.
[26:74]Then he began to curse and swear, saying, I know not the man.
And immediately a cock crew; [26:75]and Peter remembered the word of
Jesus, who said, Before a cock crows you will deny me thrice; and he
went out and wept bitterly.




