CHAPTER XXV. CHRIST BEFORE PONTIUS PILATE.


1 [27:1]AND when it was morning all the chief priests and the elders of
the people took counsel against Jesus to kill him.  [27:2]And having
bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate, the
procurator. [27:3]Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he was
condemned, repenting, returned the thirty shekels of silver [$16.80] to
the chief priests and elders, [27:4] saying, I have sinned, betraying
innocent blood. But they said, What is that to us? see you to it.
[27:5]And throwing down the silver in the temple he departed; and
having gone away strangled himself.

2 [27:6]And the chief priests taking the silver said, It is not lawful
to put it into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.
[27:7]And taking counsel, they bought with it the potter's field for a
burying place for strangers. [27:8]For this reason, the field is called
a field of blood to this day. [27:9]Then was fulfilled the word spoken
by Jeremiah the prophet, saying; And they took the thirty shekels of
silver, the price of him that was prized, whom [men] from the sons of
Israel set a price upon, [27:10]and gave them for the potter's field,
as the Lord commanded me.

3 [27:11]And Jesus stood before the procurator; and the procurator
asked him, saying, Are you the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him,
As you say. [27:12] And when he was accused by the chief priests and
elders he answered nothing. [27:13]Then Pilate said to him, Do you not
hear how many things they testify against you? [27:14]And he answered
him not a word; so that the procurator wondered greatly.

4 [27:15]And at the feast the procurator was accustomed to release to
the multitude one prisoner, whom they chose; [27:16]and he then had a
noted prisoner called Barabbas.  [27:17]When, therefore, they were
assembled together, Pilate said to them, Which do you wish me to
release to you? Barabbas? or Jesus, called Christ? [27:18]For he knew
that they had delivered him up from envy. [27:19]And as he sat on the
tribunal his wife sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that
just man, for I have suffered much to-day on his account, from a dream.

5 [27:20]But the chief priests and elders persuaded the people to ask
for Barabbas, and to destroy Jesus. [27:21]And the procurator answered
and said to them, Which of the two do you wish me to release to you?
And they said, Barabbas. [27:22]Pilate said to them, What then shall I
do to Jesus, called Christ? They all said, Let him be crucified.
[27:23]But he said, [No]; for what evil has he done? And they cried
more vehemently, saying, Let him be crucified.

6 [27:24]And Pilate seeing that he accomplished nothing, but that
rather a tumult was made, took water and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this man; see you to
it. [27:25]And all the people answered and said, His blood be upon us
and upon our children. [27:26]Then he released Barabbas to them, and
having scourged Jesus delivered him up to be crucified.




