CHAPTER XXVI. CHRIST'S DEATH AND BURIAL.


1 [27:27]THEN the soldiers of the procurator taking Jesus to the
Praetorium assembled about him the whole cohort, [27:28]and stripped
him, and put on him a crimson cloak, [27:29]and making a crown of
thorns they put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they
knelt before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
[27:30]And they spit on him, and took the reed and beat him on his
head. [27:31]And when they had mocked him, they took the cloak off from
him, and put on him his own clothes, and led him away to crucify him.

2 [27:32]And going out, they found a Cyrenian by the name of Simon,
whom they compelled to bear his cross. [27:33]And coming to a place
called Golgotha, which is called A place of a cranium, [27:34]they gave
him vinegar to drink mixed with gall; and when he had tasted of it he
would not drink.

3 [27:35]And having crucified him, they parted his garments, casting
lots, [27:36]and sat down and watched him there.  [27:37]And they put
over his head his accusation, written; THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE
JEWS. [27:38]Then two robbers were crucified with him, one on the right
hand, and the other on the left.

4 [27:39]And those who went by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,
[27:40]and saying, You that destroy the temple and build it in three
days, save yourself. If you are the Son of God, come down from the
cross. [27:41]And the chief priests in like manner also mocked him,
with the scribes and elders, and said, [27:42]He saved others, himself
he cannot save. If he is the king of Israel let him come down now from
the cross, and we will believe on him; [27:43]he trusted in God; let
him deliver him if he wishes for him; for he said, I am a Son of God.
[27:44]The robbers also that were crucified with him did the same, and
reproached him.  [27:45]And from the sixth hour there was darkness on
all the land till the ninth hour; [27:46]and at about the ninth hour
Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that
is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? [27:47]And some of those
standing there hearing him, said, He calls for Elijah.  [27:48]And one
of them ran immediately to him, and took a sponge, and filled it with
vinegar, and putting it on a reed gave it to him to drink. [27:49]But
the rest said, Let him alone; let us see if Elijah will come and save
him. [27:50]And Jesus crying again with a loud voice, gave up the
spirit.

5 [27:51]And behold, the vail of the temple was rent in two, from top
to bottom, and the earth was shaken, and the rocks rent, [27:52]and the
tombs were opened, and many bodies of saints that slept arose,
[27:53]and going out of the tombs, after his resurrection entered into
the holy city, and appeared to many.

6 [27:54]And the centurion and those with him watching Jesus, seeing
the earthquake, and the [other] events which occurred, were greatly
afraid, and said, Certainly, this was a Son of God.  [27:55]And there
were many women there, beholding from afar, who had followed Jesus from
Galilee, to wait upon him; [27:56]among whom were Mary the Magdalene,
and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of
Zebedee.

7 [27:57]And when it was evening a rich man came from Arimathea, by the
name of Joseph, who himself also was a disciple of Jesus; [27:58]this
man went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.  Then Pilate
commanded it to be given him; [27:59]and Joseph took the body, and
wrapped it in clean linen, [27:60] and placed it in a new tomb of his
which he had excavated in a rock, and having rolled a great stone to
the door of the tomb he went away; [27:61]and Mary the Magdalene and
the other Mary were there, sitting opposite to the tomb.




