CHAPTER XXVII. CHRIST AFTER HIS RESURRECTION.


1 [27:62]AND on the next day, which is after the preparation, the chief
priests and Pharisees were assembled together to Pilate, [27:63]and
said, Sir, we remember that this deceiver said when he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise. [27:64]Command, therefore, the tomb to be
made safe till the third day, lest his disciples should come and steal
him, and say to the people, He is raised from the dead, and the last
error be worse than the first.  [27:65]Pilate said to them, You have a
guard; go and make it as safe as you can. [27:66]And they went and made
the tomb safe with a guard, having sealed the stone.

2 [28:1]And after the sabbath, when it began to dawn on the first day
of the week, came Mary the Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the
tomb. [28:2]And behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of
the Lord descending from heaven came and rolled away the stone and sat
upon it. [28:3]And his appearance was like lightning, and his clothing
as white as snow; [28:4]and from fear of him the keepers shook and
became like dead men. [28:5]And the angel answered and said to the
women, Fear not, for I know that you seek Jesus the crucified. [28:6]He
is not here, for he is raised, as he said. Come and see the place where
the Lord lay, [28:7]and go immediately and tell his disciples that he
is raised from the dead; and behold, he will go before you into
Galilee; there shall you see him. Behold, I have told you. [28:8]And
going out immediately from the tomb with fear and great joy, they ran
to tell his disciples.

3 [28:9]And behold, Jesus also met them, saying, Hail! And they
approached him, and took hold of his feet, and worshipped him.
[28:10]Then Jesus said to them, Fear not; go and tell my brothers to go
to Galilee, and there they shall see me. [28:11]And as they went,
behold, some of the guard came into the city and told the chief priests
all the things which had happened. [28:12]And being assembled with the
elders, and taking counsel, they gave large sums of money to the
soldiers, [28:13]saying, Say that his disciples came by night and stole
him while we slept; [28:14]and if this is heard of by the procurator we
will satisfy him and secure you. [28:15]And they took the silver and
did as they were told; and this report is circulated among the Jews to
this day.

4 [28:16]And the eleven disciples went to Galilee on the mountain where
Jesus had appointed them; [28:17]and they saw and worshipped him; but
some doubted. [28:18]And Jesus coming near spoke to them, saying, All
power is given me in heaven and on the earth; [28:19]go and disciple
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit; [28:20]teaching them to keep all things which I
have commanded you; and behold, I am with you always till the
consummation of the world.





