CHAPTER II. CHRIST FORGIVING SINS, EATING WITH PUBLICANS AND SINNERS, AND HIS DOCTRINE OF FASTING, OF THE SABBATH, ETC.

1 [2:1]AND entering again into Capernaum after some days, it was
reported that he was in the house. [2:2]And many came together
immediately, so that there was no room, not even in the places about
the door; and he spoke to them the word. [2:3]And they came to him
bringing a paralytic, borne by four; [2:4]and not being able to
approach him on account of the multitude, they uncovered the roof where
he was, and having made an opening let down the bed on which the
paralytic was laid. [2:5]And Jesus seeing their faith, said to the
paralytic, Son, your sins are forgiven.

2 [2:6]And some of the scribes were sitting there, and reasoned in
their minds, [2:7]Why does this man speak so? he blasphemes.  Who can
forgive sins but God alone? [2:8]And Jesus immediately knowing in his
spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, said to them, Why do
you reason in your minds? [2:9]in what respect is it easier to say to
the paralytic, Your sins are forgiven you, than to say, Arise, take up
your bed and walk?  [2:10]But that you may know that the Son of man has
power to forgive sins on the earth, he said to the paralytic, [2:11]I
tell you, arise, take your bed and go to your house. [2:12]And he was
raised up and immediately taking his bed he went away before all; so
that all were astonished, and glorified God, saying, We never saw the
like.

3 [2:13]And he went out again by the lake, and all the multitude came
to him, and he taught them. [2:14]And passing by he saw Levi, the son
of Alpheus, sitting at the custom house, and said to him, Follow me;
and he arose and followed him. [2:15]And he was reclining in his house,
and many publicans and sinners also reclined with Jesus and his
disciples, for many also followed him. [2:16]And the scribes and
Pharisees seeing him eating with sinners and publicans, said to his
disciples, Why does he eat and drink with sinners and publicans?
[2:17]And Jesus hearing it, said to them, The well need not a
physician, but the ill; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.

4 [2:18]And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fasted.  And
they came and said to him, Why do the disciples of John and the
disciples of the Pharisees fast, and your disciples fast not?
[2:19]And Jesus said to them, Can the sons of the bridechamber fast as
long as the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they cannot fast, [2:20]but days will come when
the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they shall fast at
that time. [2:21]No one sews a piece of undressed cloth on an old
garment; if he does the new piece takes away its fullness from the old,
and the rent is made worse. [2:22]And no one puts new wine into old
bottles; if he does the wine breaks the bottles, and the wine and the
bottles are destroyed.

5 [2:23]And he was passing on the sabbath through the grain fields, and
his disciples began to make their way, picking heads of grain.
[2:24]And the Pharisees said to him, See what they do on the sabbath,
which it is not lawful to do. [2:25]And he said to them, Have you never
read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry? both he and
those with him? [2:26]How he entered into the house of God under
Abiathar the chief priest, and eat the show bread, which it was not
lawful to eat, except for the priests, and gave also to them that were
with him? [2:27]And he said to them, The sabbath was made for man, and
not man for the sabbath; [2:28]so that the Son of man is Lord even of
the sabbath.

6 [3:1]And he entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man
there having a withered hand. [3:2]And they watched him [to see] if he
would cure him on the sabbath, that they might accuse him. [3:3]And he
said to the man having the withered hand, Arise in the midst. [3:4]And
he said to them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath, or to do evil?
to save life, or to kill? And they were silent. [3:5]And looking around
on them in anger, being grieved at the hardness of their hearts, he
said to the man, Stretch out your hand. And he stretched it out, and
his hand was restored. [3:6]And the Pharisees went out immediately with
the Herodians, and took counsel against him to kill him.

7 [3:7]And Jesus went away with his disciples to the lake; and a great
multitude followed him from Galilee, [3:8]and from Jerusalem, and from
Judea, and from Idumea, and beyond the Jordan. And those about Tyre and
Sidon, a great multitude, hearing what he did, came to him. [3:9]And he
told his disciples to have a boat constantly attend him on account of
the multitude, that they might not throng him. [3:10]For he cured many,
so that all who had diseases fell down before him, that they might
touch him; [3:11]and the impure spirits when they saw him fell down
before him, and cried, saying, You are the Son of God. [3:12] And he
strictly charged them not to make him known.




