CHAPTER III. CHRIST'S BAPTISM AND TEMPTATION.


1 [3:1]AND in those days came John the Baptist preaching in the
wilderness of Judea, saying, [3:2]Change your minds, for the kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. [3:3]For this is he that was spoken of by Isaiah the
prophet, saying; A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the
way of the Lord, make his paths straight.  [3:4]And this John had his
clothes of camel's hair, and a leather girdle about his loins, and his
food was locusts and wild honey.  [3:5]Then went out to him Jerusalem,
and all Judea, and all the region about the Jordan, [3:6] and were
baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

2 [3:7]And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come for the
baptism, he said to them; Offspring of vipers, who has warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? [3:8]Bear fruit, therefore, worthy of a
change of mind; [3:9]and think not to say within yourselves, We have
Abraham for a father; for I tell you that God is able of these stones
to raise up children to Abraham; [3:10]and already the axe lies at the
root of the trees; every tree, therefore, which bears not good fruit is
cut down and cast into the fire. [3:11]I indeed baptize you with water
to a change of mind; but he that comes after me is mightier than I,
whose shoes I am not fit to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy
Spirit, and fire; [3:12]whose winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly clean his threshing floor, and gather his wheat into
the storehouse; but the chaff he will burn with an inextinguishable
fire.

3 [3:13]Then came Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be
baptized by him. [3:14]But, he refused him, saying, I have need to be
baptized by you, and do you come to me? [3:15]But Jesus answered and
said to him, Suffer me now; for thus, it becomes us to complete all
righteousness. Then he suffered him; [3:16] and Jesus being baptized
went up immediately from the water, and behold, the heavens were
opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descend like a dove and come upon
him. [3:17]And behold, a voice from the heavens, saying, This is my
beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

4 [4:1]Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted by the devil. [4:2]And having fasted forty days and forty
nights, he was afterwards hungry. [4:3]And the tempter came and said to
him, If you are the Son of God, command these stones to become bread.
[4:4]And he answered and said; It is written, man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word which proceeds from the mouth of God.
[4:5]Then the devil took him into the holy city, and placed him on the
pinnacle of the temple, [4:6]and said to him, If you are the Son of
God, cast yourself down; for it is written, He shall give his angels
charge concerning you, and they shall take you up on their hands, lest
at any time you dash your foot against a stone. [4:7]Jesus said to him,
Again it is written, You shall not try the Lord your God.  [4:8]Again
the devil took him away on a very high mountain, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world, and their glory, [4:9]and said to him, All these
things will I give you, if you will fall down and worship me.
[4:10]Then Jesus said to him, Get behind me Satan; for it is written,
You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.
[4:11]Then the devil left him; and behold angels came and waited on him.




