CHAPTER IV. CHRIST'S PARABLES BY THE LAKE, AND HIS STILLING A TEMPEST.


1 [4:1]AND
again he taught by the lake; and a very great multitude came together
to him, so that entering into a ship he sat on the lake, and all the
multitude were by the lake on the land.  [4:2]And he taught them many
things in parables, and said to them, in his teaching, [4:3]Hear!
behold a sower went out to sow; [4:4]and in sowing, some fell on the
way, and the birds came and devoured it. [4:5]And some fell on a rocky
place, where it had not much earth, and it came up immediately, because
it had no depth of earth; [4:6]and when the sun rose, it was scorched,
and because it had no root it was dried up. [4:7]And some fell among
thorns; and the thorns came up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
[4:8]And some fell on good ground, and produced fruit, growing up and
increasing, and bore one thirty, one sixty, and one a hundred. [4:9]And
he said, He that has ears, let him hear.

2 [4:10]And when he was alone, those about him, with the twelve, asked
him the parable. [4:11]And he said to them, To you is given the mystery
of the kingdom of God, but to those without all things are in parables;
[4:12]that seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may
hear, and not understand, lest at any time they should turn, and be
forgiven. [4:13]And he said to them, Do you not know this parable? How
then will you know all parables?

3 [4:14]The sower sows the word. [4:15]And these are those where the
word is sown by the way; and when they hear, Satan comes immediately
and takes away the word which was sown upon them.  [4:16]And these in
like manner are those sown on the rocky places; when they hear the
word, they immediately receive it with joy, [4:17]and have no root in
themselves, but are temporary [disciples]. Then, when affliction or
persecution occurs on account of the word, they are immediately
offended. [4:18]And those sown among thorns are different. They are
those who hear the word, [4:19]and the cares of life, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the desires of other things coming in,
choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. [4:20]And these are those
sown in good ground, who hear the word, and receive it, and bear fruit,
one thirty, and one sixty, and one a hundred.

4 [4:21]And he said to them, Does a light come to be put under a modius
[1.916 gallon measure], or under a bed? and not to be put in a
candlestick? [4:22]For there is nothing hid that shall not be made
manifest, nor any thing concealed that shall not come to light.
[4:23]If any one has ears to hear, let him hear. [4:24]And he said to
them, Consider what you hear. With what measure you measure it shall be
measured to you, and more shall be given you.  [4:25]For whoever has,
to him shall be given; and whoever has not, from him even what he has
shall be taken away.

5 [4:26]And he said, So is the kingdom of God as a man casts the seeds
into the earth, [4:27]and sleeps and wakes, night and day, and the seed
germinates, and grows he knows not how. [4:28]The earth produces
spontaneously, first the stalk, then the head, then the full wheat in
the head. [4:29]And when the wheat delivers itself, he immediately
sends out the sickle, because the harvest has come. [4:30]And he said,
To what shall I liken the kingdom of God? or with what parable shall I
present it? [4:31]It is like a mustard seed, which when sown in the
earth is the least of all seeds on the earth; [4:32]but when sown, it
comes up, and becomes the greatest of all plants, and produces great
branches, so that the birds of heaven can dwell under its shade.
[4:33]And with many such parables spoke he the word to them as they
could hear; [4:34]but without a parable spoke he not to them; and,
privately, he explained all things to his disciples.

6 [4:35]And on that day, when it was evening, he said to them, Let us
cross over to the other side. [4:36]And dismissing the multitude, they
took him as he was in the ship; and other ships also were with him.
[4:37]And there was a great tempest of wind, and the waves beat over
the ship, so that the ship was already filled. [4:38]And he was in the
stern, on the pillow, asleep. And they awoke him and said to him,
Teacher, do you not care that we perish? [4:39]And he arose, and
rebuked the wind, and said to the lake, Hush! Be still! And the wind
ceased, and there was a great calm. [4:40]And he said to them, Why are
you so fearful? How have you no faith? [4:41]And they were greatly
afraid, and said one to another, What man is this, that even the wind
and the lake obey him?




