CHAPTER V. CHRIST CURING A DEMONIAC AND THE WOMAN WITH A HEMORRHAGE, AND RAISING A DEAD CHILD.


1 [5:1]AND they came across the lake to the country of the Gerasenes.
[5:2]And as he went out of the ship, a man with an impure spirit
immediately met him from the tombs, [5:3]who lived in the tombs, and
none could bind him with a chain; [5:4]for he was often bound with
fetters and chains, and his chains were broken by him, and his fetters
crushed, and no one could subdue him. [5:5]And he was always night and
day in the tombs, and in the mountains, crying, and cutting himself
with stones. [5:6]And seeing Jesus at a distance, he ran and worshipped
him, [5:7]and crying with a loud voice, said, What have you to do with
me, Jesus, son of the most high God? I adjure you, by God, not to
torment me. [5:8] For he said to him, Impure spirit, come out of the
man. [5:9]And he asked him, What is your name? And he said to him, My
name is Legion, for we are many.

2 [5:10]And they besought him much that he would not send them out of
the country. [5:11]And there was there on the mountain a great herd of
swine feeding. [5:12]And they besought him, saying, Send us to the
swine, that we may go into them. [5:13]And Jesus immediately permitted
them. And the impure spirits going out entered into the swine, and the
herd rushed down a precipice into the lake, about two thousand, and
were drowned in the lake.

3 [5:14]And those who fed them fled and told it in the city and in the
country; and they came out to see what was done. [5:15]And they came to
Jesus, and saw the demoniac who had the legion, sitting down, clothed,
and in his right mind, and they were afraid. [5:16]And those who saw
related to them how it had been with the demoniac, and concerning the
swine. [5:17]And they besought him to depart from their bounds.
[5:18]And entering into the ship, the man that had been a demoniac
besought him that he might go with him; [5:19]and he permitted him not,
but said to him, Go to your home, to your friends, and relate to them
what the Lord has done for you, and what mercy he has shown you.
[5:20]And he went away and proclaimed in the Decapolis what great
things Jesus had done for him; and all wondered.

4 [5:21]And Jesus having crossed again in the ship to the other side, a
great multitude came together to him; and he was by the lake. [5:22]And
one of the synagogue rulers came, Jairus by name, and seeing him, fell
at his feet, [5:23] and besought him much, saying, My little daughter
is at the point of death; come and lay hands on her, that she may be
restored, and she shall live.  [5:24]And he went away with him; and a
great multitude followed him, and thronged him. [5:25]And a certain
woman having a hemorrhage of twelve years, [5:26]and having taken many
things by many physicians, and expended all her property, and not being
benefited, but rather growing worse, [5:27]hearing of Jesus, came in
the crowd behind him and touched his clothes. [5:28]For she said, If I
can touch his clothes I shall be cured.

5 [5:29]And immediately the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she
knew in herself that she was cured of the plague.  [5:30]And Jesus
immediately knowing in himself that a power had gone out from him,
turning round in the crowd said, Who touched my clothes? [5:31]And his
disciples said to him, You see the multitude throng you, and do you
say, Who touched me? [5:32]And he looked round to see her that had done
this. [5:33]And the woman being afraid, and trembling, knowing what was
done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
[5:34]And he said to her, Daughter, your faith has cured you; go in
peace, and be well of your plague.

6 [5:35]And while he was yet speaking persons came from the house of
the synagogue ruler, saying, Your daughter is dead; why trouble the
teacher? [5:36] And Jesus hearing the word spoken, said to the
synagogue ruler, Fear not, only believe. [5:37]And he permitted no man
to accompany him except Peter, and James, and John the brother of
James. [5:38]And they came to the house of the synagogue ruler, and saw
the tumult, and the people weeping and lamenting much. [5:39]And he
went in and said to them, Why do you make a tumult and weep? the little
child is not dead, but sleeps. [5:40]And they derided him. And putting
them all out, he took the father and mother of the little child, and
those with him, and went in where the little child was; [5:41]and
taking the hand of the little child, he said to her, Talitha cum, which
is interpreted, Girl, I tell you arise; [5:42]and immediately the girl
arose and walked about, for she was twelve years old. And they were
astonished with great astonishment. [5:43]And he charged them strictly
that no one should know it, and directed that food should be given her.




