CHAPTER VII. 

CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF DEFILEMENT; CURING A GENTILE DEMONIAC, AND A DEAF AND DUMB PERSON.

1 [7:1]AND the Pharisees and some of the scribes having come from
Jerusalem came together to him, [7:2]and seeing some of his disciples
eat bread with defiled, that is, unwashed hands, [they found fault].
[7:3]For the Pharisees and all the Jews eat not unless they wash their
hands with the fist, holding the tradition of the elders. [7:4]And from
a market, unless they baptize they eat not; and there are many other
[customs] which they have received to hold; baptisms, of cups and
sextuses [1 1-2 pint measures], and brass vessels, and beds. [7:5]And
the Pharisees and scribes asked, Why do not your disciples conform to
the tradition of the elders; but eat bread with defiled hands?

2 [7:6]And he said to them, Well did Isaiah prophecy of you,
hypocrites, as it is written; This people honors me with the lips, but
their heart is far from me; [7:7]but in vain do they worship me,
teaching for teachings the commandments of men; [7:8]for leaving the
commandment of God, you hold the tradition of men.

3 [7:9]And he said to them, Well do you reject the commandment of God,
to keep your tradition; [7:10]for Moses said, Honor your father and
your mother, and, He that reviles father or mother, let him surely die.
[7:11]But you say, If a man says to his father or mother, It is a
corban, which is a gift, by whatever you might be profited by me, [he
shall be free]; [7:12]and suffer him no longer to do any thing for his
father or his mother; [7:13]making the word of God of no effect by your
tradition which you have delivered; and many such things you do.
[7:14]And again calling all the people, he said to them, Hear me, all
of you, and understand. [7:15]Nothing which being out of a man entering
into him, can defile him; but those things which proceed from the man,
these are the things which defile the man.

4 [7:17]And when he had gone from the multitude into the house, his
disciples asked him concerning the parable. [7:18]And he said to them,
Are you also so without understanding? Do you not understand that
nothing which enters into a man from without can defile him,
[7:19]because it enters not into his heart, but into the stomach, and
goes out to the earth, purifying all aliments?  [7:20] But he said,
that which comes out of the man, this defiles him; [7:21]for from
within, from the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, fornications,
[7:22] thefts, murders, adulteries, covetousness, malice, deceit,
lewdness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. [7:23]All these
evil things proceed from within, and defile the man.

5 [7:24]And he rose up, and departed thence to the regions of Tyre. And
entering into a house he wished no one to know it; and he could not be
hid. [7:25]But immediately, a woman whose little daughter had an impure
spirit, hearing of him, came and fell down at his feet; [7:26]and she
was a Greek, a Syrophenician by race; and she asked him to cast the
demon out of her daughter.  [7:27]And he said to her, Suffer the
children first to be filled; it is not right to take the children's
bread, and cast it to the little dogs. [7:28]And she answered and said
to him, Yes, Lord; for even the little dogs under the table eat of the
children's crumbs. [7:29]And he said to her, For this speech, go; the
demon has gone out of your daughter. [7:30]And departing to her house,
she found the little child laid on the bed, and the demon gone out.

6 [7:31]And again going out of the bounds of Tyre, he came through
Sidon, to the lake of Galilee, in the midst of the bounds of Decapolis.
[7:32]And they brought him a dumb man that stammered, and besought him
to put his hand on him. [7:33]And taking him from the multitude by
himself, he put his fingers in his ears, and spit, and touched his
tongue, [7:34]and looking up to heaven he groaned, and said to him,
Ephphatha, which is, Be opened. [7:35]And immediately his ears were
opened, and the cord of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke correctly.
[7:36]And he charged them to tell no one; but as much as he charged
them, so much the more they proclaimed [his works]. [7:37]And they were
astonished above measure, and said, He has done all things well; he
makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.




