CHAPTER VIII. CHRIST FEEDING THE FOUR THOUSAND, REFUSING TO GIVE A SIGN FROM HEAVEN, WARNING HIS DISCIPLES AGAINST THE PHARISEES, CURING A BLIND MAN, CALLING FORTH PETER'S CONFESSION, AND PREDICTING HIS OWN DEATH.


1 [8:1]IN those days, again a very great multitude being [around him],
and not having any thing to eat, calling his disciples, he said to
them, [8:2]I have compassion on the multitude, because already they
have continued with me three days, and have nothing to eat; [8:3]and if
I send them fasting to their homes, they will faint by the way, for
some of them are from afar. [8:4]And his disciples answered him, Whence
will one be able to satisfy these with bread here in a wilderness?
[8:5]And he asked them, How many loaves have you? And they said, Seven.
[8:6]And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground; and
taking the seven loaves, and giving thanks, he broke and gave them to
his disciples to set before them, and they set them before the people.
[8:7]And they had a few small fishes; and having blessed them, he
commanded to present them also. [8:8]And they eat and were filled; and
they took up of the fragments that remained over, seven store-baskets;
[8:9]and they were about four thousand. And he dismissed them.

2 [8:10]And entering immediately into the ship, with his disciples, he
came into the parts of Dalmanutha. [8:11]And the Pharisees went out and
questioned him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, to try him.
[8:12]And groaning in his spirit, he said, Why does this generation
seek a sign? I tell you truly, there shall no sign be given to this
generation. [8:13]And leaving them, he entered again into the ship, and
went away to the other side.

3 [8:14]And they forgot to take bread, and had but one loaf with them
in the ship. [8:15]And he charged them, saying, Observe and beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. [8:16]And they
reasoned with themselves, because they had no bread. [8:17]And Jesus
knowing it, said to them, Why do you reason because you have no bread?
Do you not yet perceive nor understand? Is your heart hardened?
[8:18]Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear?
And do you not remember?  [8:19]When I broke the five loaves for the
five thousand, how many traveling baskets of fragments took you up?
They said to him, Twelve. [8:20]And when I broke the seven loaves for
the four thousand, how many store-baskets of fragments took you up? And
they said, Seven. [8:21]And he said to them, Do you not yet understand?

4 [8:22]And they came to Bethsaida; and they brought him a blind man,
and besought him to touch him. [8:23]And taking the hand of the blind
man, he brought him out of the village, and spitting on his eyes, and
putting his hands on him, he asked him, Do you see any thing? [8:24]And
looking up he said, I see men, as trees walking. [8:25]Then he put his
hands on his eyes again, and he looked, and was restored, and saw all
things clearly. [8:26]And he sent him to his house, saying, Go not into
the village.

5 [8:27]And Jesus went away, and his disciples, to the villages of
Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples, saying to
them, Who do men say that I am? [8:28]And they spoke to him, saying,
John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others still, One of the
prophets. [8:29]And he asked them, And who say you that I am? Peter
answered and said to him, You are the Christ. [8:30] And he charged
them to tell no one of him.  [8:31]And he began to teach them that the
Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and
the chief priests, and the scribes; and be killed, and after three days
be raised again. [8:32]And he spoke this word plainly; and Peter taking
hold of him, rebuked him. [8:33]But turning round, and looking on his
disciples, he rebuked Peter, and said, Get behind me, Satan! for you
regard not the things of God, but the things of men.

6 [8:34]And calling the multitude, with his disciples, he said to them,
Whoever wishes to follow after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. [8:35]For whoever wishes to save his life,
shall lose it; and whoever shall lose his life for my sake, and that of
the good news, shall save it. [8:36]For what will it profit a man to
gain the whole world and lose his life?  [8:37]for what is the exchange
for his life? [8:38]For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words, in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him will the Son of man also
be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy
angels. [9:1]And he said to them, I tell you truly, that there are some
of those standing here, who shall not taste death till they see the
kingdom of God having come with power.




