CHAPTER X. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF MARRIAGE, CHILDREN AND THE WAY OF SALVATION, HIS DEATH PREDICTED, AND SIGHT RESTORED TO BARTIMEUS.


1 [10:1]AND he arose and went thence into the bounds of Judea, and
beyond the Jordan; and again multitudes came together to him, and again
he taught them as he was accustomed. [10:2]And the Pharisees came and
asked him, to try him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife?
[10:3]And he answered and said to them, What did Moses command you?
[10:4]And they said, Moses permitted us to write a bill of divorcement
and put her away. [10:5]And Jesus said to them, Because of your
hardness of heart, he wrote you this ordinance; [10:6]but from the
beginning of creation, he made them male and female. [10:7]For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and the two shall be one
flesh; [10:8] so that they are no longer two, but one flesh. [10:9]What
God therefore has yoked together, let not man separate.

2 [10:10]And his disciples asked him again, in the house, concerning
this. [10:11]And he said to them, Whoever puts away his wife and
marries another, commits adultery with her; [10:12]and if a woman puts
away her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.

3 [10:13]And they brought him little children that he should touch
them; and the disciples rebuked those who brought them.  [10:14]But
Jesus seeing it, was displeased, and said to them, Suffer the little
children to come to me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom
of God. [10:15]I tell you truly, that whoever does not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter into it. [10:16]And
he took them in his arms, and laid his hands on them, and blessed them.

4 [10:17]And as he was going on the way, one ran before and kneeled
down to him, and asked him, Good teacher, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? [10:18]And Jesus said to him, Why do you call me good?
none is good but one, God. [10:19]You know the commandments; You shall
not commit adultery, You shall not kill, You shall not steal, You shall
not testify falsely, You shall not defraud, Honor your father and
mother. [10:20]And he answered and said to him, Teacher, all these have
I kept from my youth.  [10:21]And Jesus looking at him, loved him, and
said to him, One thing you lack; go and sell what you have, and give to
the poor, and you shall have a treasure in heaven; and come and take up
your cross and follow me. [10:22]And he was grieved at this saying, and
went away sad, for he had great possessions.

5 [10:23]And Jesus looking around said to his disciples, With what
difficulty shall those having riches enter into the kingdom of God!
[10:24]And the disciples were astonished at his words.  But Jesus
answered again and said to them, Children, with what difficulty shall
those who trust in riches enter into the kingdom of God! [10:25]It is
easier for a camel to pass through the eye of the needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. [10:26]And they were greatly
astonished, and said to themselves, Who then can be saved? [10:27]Jesus
looking on them, said, With men it is impossible, but not with God; for
with God all things are possible.

6 [10:28]Peter said to him, Behold we have left all things and followed
you. [10:29]Jesus said, I tell you truly, there is no one who has left
a house, or brothers, or sisters, or a mother, or father, or children,
or lands, for my sake, and for the sake of the good news, [10:30]who
shall not receive a hundred fold now at this present time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions, and in the life to come eternal life. [10:31]But many
first shall be last, and the last first.

7 [10:32]And they were on the way going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus went
before them; and they were amazed, and afraid, as they followed him.
And again taking the twelve aside, he told them the things that were
about to befall him; [10:33] Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son
of man will be delivered up to the chief priests and scribes, and they
will condemn him to death, and deliver him to the gentiles, [10:34]and
they will mock him, and spit on him, and scourge him, and kill him, and
after three days he shall rise again.

8 [10:35]And James and John, sons of Zebedee, came to him, saying,
Teacher, we wish you to do for us what we will ask of you. [10:36]And
he said to them, What do you wish me to do for you? [10:37]And they
said to him, Grant us that we may sit one on your right hand, and the
other on your left, in your glory.  [10:38] And Jesus said to them, You
know not what you ask. Can you drink of the cup of which I drink? or be
baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized? [10:39] And they
said to him, We can. And Jesus said to them, You shall drink of the cup
of which I drink, and be baptized with the baptism with which I am
baptized; [10:40]but to sit on my right hand, or left, is not mine to
give but to those for whom it is prepared.

9 [10:41]And the ten, hearing this, were displeased with James and
John. [10:42]And Jesus called them and said to them, You know that
those who desire to rule the gentiles exercise lordship over them, and
their great men exercise authority over them; [10:43]but it shall not
be so with you. But whoever wishes to be great among you, let him be
your minister; [10:44]and whoever wishes to be first of you, let him be
a servant of all.  [10:45]For the Son of man also came not to be
served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many.

10 [10:46]And they came to Jericho. And as he went from Jericho, and
his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timeus, Bartimeus, a
blind beggar, sat by the way. [10:47]And hearing that Jesus was the
Nazarene, he cried, saying, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.
[10:48]And many charged him to be still.  But he cried much more, Son
of David, have mercy on me.  [10:49]And Jesus stopping, said, Call him.
And they called the blind man, saying to him, Be of good courage;
arise, he calls you. [10:50]And he cast aside his garment, and leaping
up went to Jesus. [10:51]And Jesus answered him and said, What do you
wish me to do for you? And the blind man said to him, Rabboni, that I
may receive my sight. [10:52]And Jesus said to him, Go; your faith has
cured you. And he immediately received sight, and followed him in the
way.




