CHAPTER XI. CHRIST ENTERING JERUSALEM IN TRIUMPH, CURSING THE BARREN FIG TREE, PURIFYING THE TEMPLE, INCULCATING FAITH IN GOD, AND REPLYING TO THE PHARISEES.


1 [11:1]AND when they came near to Jerusalem, at Bethphage and Bethany,
at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, [11:2]and said to
them, Go into the village opposite to you, and as you enter it you will
immediately find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat; untie him and
bring him. [11:3]And if any one says to you, Why do you do this? say,
The Lord has need of him, and he will immediately send him. [11:4]And
they went and found a colt tied at the door without, at the crossing of
the streets, and they untied him. [11:5]And some of those standing
there said to them, Why do you untie the colt? [11:6]And they said as
Jesus directed, and they let them go.

2 [11:7]And they brought the colt to Jesus, and put on it their
clothes, and he sat on it. [11:8]And many spread their clothes in the
way; and others cutting branches from the trees spread them in the way;
[11:9]and those who went before, and those who followed, cried,
Hosanna! Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord!
[11:10]Blessed is the kingdom of our father David, which is coming!
Hosanna in the highest [heavens]! [11:11]And Jesus went into Jerusalem,
and into the temple, and looking round on all things when it was now
evening he went out to Bethany with the twelve.

3 [11:12]And on the next day as they returned from Bethany he was
hungry; [11:13]and seeing a fig tree at a distance having leaves, he
went to see if he could find any thing on it. And having come to it, he
found nothing except leaves, for it was not time for figs. [11:14]And
he spoke and said to it, Let no one eat fruit of you forever! And his
disciples heard him.

4 [11:15]And they came to Jerusalem, and going into the temple he cast
out those that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables
of the brokers, and the seats of those that sold doves, [11:16]and
permitted no one to carry a vessel through the temple. [11:17]And he
taught them, saying, It is written, my house shall be called a house of
prayer for all nations; but you have made it a den of robbers.
[11:18]And the scribes and chief priests came and sought how they might
destroy him, for they feared him, because all the people were
astonished at his teaching. [11:19]And when it was evening he went out
of the city.

5 [11:20]And passing along in the morning, they saw the fig tree dried
up from the roots. [11:21]And Peter remembering, said to him, Rabbi,
behold the fig tree which you cursed is dried up.  [11:22]And Jesus
answered and said to them, Have faith in God; [11:23]I tell you truly,
that whoever shall say to this mountain, be raised up and be cast into
the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what
he says will be done, whatever he says shall be done for him.
[11:24]Therefore I tell you, all things whatever which you ask in
prayer, believe that you shall receive them, and you shall have them.
[11:25] And when you stand praying, forgive if you have any thing
against any, that your Father in heaven may also forgive your offenses.

6 [11:27]And they came again to Jerusalem; and as he was walking in the
temple, the chief priests, and scribes, and elders came to him,
[11:28]and said to him, By what authority do you do these things? or
who gave you this authority to do them? [11:29]And Jesus said to them,
I will ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell you by what
authority I do these things. [11:30]The baptism of John; was it from
heaven, or of men? answer me.  [11:31]And they reasoned with
themselves, saying, If we say from heaven, he will say, Why did you not
believe him? [11:32]But if we say from men, they feared the people, for
all considered John as a prophet indeed. [11:33]And they answered and
said to Jesus, We do not know. And Jesus said to them, Neither do I
tell you by what authority I do these things.

7 [12:1]And he said to them, in parables, A man planted a vineyard and
made a hedge about it, and dug a wine-vat, and built a tower, and let
it out to husbandmen, and went abroad. [12:2]And he sent a servant to
the husbandmen at the time to receive from the husbandmen of the fruits
of the vineyard; [12:3] and they took him, and beat him, and sent him
away empty. [12:4]And again he sent another servant to them, and they
wounded him on the head, and treated him shamefully. [12:5]And he sent
another, and they killed him; and many others, and they beat some, and
killed some. [12:6]Having yet one beloved son, he sent him last to
them, saying, They will reverence my son.

8 [12:7]But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.  [12:8]And
seizing him, they killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.
[12:9]What will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy
those husbandmen, and let the vineyard to others. [12:10]Have you not
read this Scripture, The stone which the builders rejected, has become
the head of a corner; [12:11]this is from the Lord, and it is wonderful
in our eyes?  [12:12]And they sought to take him, and feared the
multitude, for they knew that he spoke this parable against them. And
they left him, and went away.

9 [12:13]And they sent to him some of the Pharisees and Herodians to
ensnare him in his words. [12:14]And they came and said to him,
Teacher, we know that you are true, and care for no one, for you
respect not the face of men, but teach the way of God in truth. Is it
lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or not? [12:15]Shall we pay? or shall
we not pay? But he knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why do you
try me? Bring me a denarius [14 cents], that I may see it. [12:16]And
they brought him one. And he said to them, Whose is this figure, and
the inscription? And they said to him, Caesar's. [12:17]And Jesus said,
Render Caesar's dues to Caesar, and God's to God. And they wondered at
him.

10 [12:18]And the Sadducees came to him, who say there is no
resurrection, and asked him, saying, [12:19]Teacher, Moses wrote to us,
that if one's brother dies and leaves a wife, and leaves no child, his
brother shall take his wife and raise up children for his brother.
[12:20]There were seven brothers; and the first took a wife and died,
and left no child; [12:21]and the second took her, and died leaving no
child; and the third in like manner. [12:22]And the seven left no
child. Last of all, the woman died also. [12:23]In the resurrection,
when they rise, whose wife shall she be? for the seven had her as a
wife.  [12:24]Jesus said to them, Do you not err on this account, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God? [12:25]For when they rise
from the dead, they neither marry nor are married, but are like angels
in heaven. [12:26]But concerning the dead, that they rise, have you not
read in the book of Moses, how God spoke to him at the bush, saying, I
am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
[12:27]He is not a God of the dead, but of the living; you greatly err.

11 [12:28]And one of the scribes coming forward hearing them disputing,
knowing that he answered them well, asked him, What commandment is
first of all? [12:29] Jesus answered, First is, Hear Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord; [12:30]and you shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength.
[12:31]Second is this, You shall love your neighbor as yourself. There
is no other commandment greater than these. [12:32]And the scribe said
to him, Well, teacher, you have said truly; there is one [God], and no
other but him; [12:33]and to love him with all the heart, and all the
understanding, and all the strength, and to love one's neighbor as
himself, is more than all burnt offerings and sacrifices. [12:34]And
Jesus seeing him, that he answered understandingly, said to him, You
are not far from the kingdom of God; and no one dared to question him
more.

12 [12:35]And Jesus answered and said, teaching in the temple, How do
the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David?  [12:36]David
himself said, by the Holy Spirit, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my
right hand, till I make your enemies your footstool. [12:37]David
himself calls him Lord, and whence is he his son? And the great
multitude heard him gladly.

13 [12:38]And he said to them in his teaching, Beware of the scribes
who desire to walk in long robes, and desire salutations in the
markets, [12:39]and the first seats in the synagogues, and the first
places at feasts; [12:40]who devour widows' houses, and for a pretence
make long prayers. They shall receive a greater judgment.

14 [12:41]And sitting opposite to the treasury, he observed how the
multitude cast copper into the treasury. And many rich men cast in
much; [12:42]and one poor widow came and cast in two lepta, which is a
quadrans [4 mills]. [12:43] And calling his disciples, he said to them,
I tell you truly, that this poor widow has cast in more than all who
have cast into the treasury.  [12:44]For all [others] have cast in of
their abundance; but she of her want has cast in all that she had her
entire living.




