CHAPTER XII. CHRIST PREDICTING THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM, AND OF THE JEWISH COMMONWEALTH.


1 [13:1]AND as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples said to
him, Teacher, see what stones, and what buildings!  [13:2]And Jesus
said to him, Do you see these great buildings?  There shall not be left
a stone upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down. [13:3]And as he
sat on the mount of Olives, opposite to the temple, Peter, and James,
and John, and Andrew, asked him privately, [13:4]Tell us when shall
these things be? And what shall be the sign when all these things are
about to be accomplished? [13:5]And Jesus said to them, See that no man
deceives you; [13:6]for many shall come in my name, saying, I am [the
Christ], and shall deceive many. [13:7]And when you hear of wars and
rumors of wars, be not afraid, for these things must be; but the end is
not yet. [13:8]For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes in [different] places,
and there shall be famines.  These are the beginnings of sorrows.

2 [13:9]But take heed to yourselves; they shall deliver you up to
Sanhedrims, and you shall be beaten in synagogues, and shall be brought
before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them.
[13:10]And the good news must first be preached to all nations.
[13:11]And when they deliver you to afflictions, be not anxious
beforehand what you shall say; but whatever is given you in that hour,
this speak; for it is not you that speak, but the Holy Spirit.
[13:12]And brother shall deliver brother to death, and father, son; and
children shall rise up against their parents and kill them; [13:13]and
you shall be hated by all on my account; but he that endures to the end
shall be saved.

3 [13:14]And when you see the abomination of desolation standing where
it ought not, let him that reads understand, then let those in Judea
flee to the mountains; [13:15]and let not him that is on the house go
down into the house, nor enter to take any thing out of his house;
[13:16]and let not him that is in the field turn back to take his
garment. [13:17]And woe to those with child, and those giving nurse in
those days! [13:18]But pray that it may not be in the winter,
[13:19]for those days shall be an affliction, such as has not been from
the beginning of the creation that God created till now, and shall not
be. [13:20]And unless the Lord had shortened those days no flesh would
be saved; but for the elects' sake, whom he has chosen, he has
shortened the days.

4 [13:21]And then if any one says to you, Behold the Christ is here!
Behold there! believe it not. [13:22]For false prophets shall arise,
and perform miracles and wonders, to deceive, if possible, the elect.
[13:23]But beware; I have foretold you all things.

5 [13:24]But in those days, after that affliction, the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, [13:25]and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers in the heavens shall be shaken.
[13:26]And then shall they see the Son of man coming in clouds, with
great power and glory. [13:27] And then shall he send his angels and
gather together the elect, from the four winds, from the end of the
earth to the end of heaven.

6 [13:28]But learn the parable of the fig tree. When its branch is now
tender and it puts forth leaves, it is known that the summer is nigh;
[13:29]so also when you see all these things occur, know that [the Son
of man] is nigh, at the doors. [13:30]I tell you truly, that this
generation shall not pass away till all these things are accomplished.
[13:31]Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away. [13:32]But of that day, and hour, knows no man, not an angel in
heaven, nor the Son; but the Father. [13:33]Observe, watch, for you
know not when the time is.

7 [13:34]As a man leaving his house to go abroad, and giving authority
to his servants, and to each one his work, commanded the porter to
watch, [13:35] watch, therefore, for you know not when the master of
the house comes; at evening, at midnight, at the cock crowing, or in
the morning; [13:36]lest, coming suddenly, he should find you sleeping.
[13:37]And what I say to you, I say to all, Watch.




