CHAPTER IV. CHRIST COMMENCING HIS PUBLIC MINISTRY.


1 [4:12]AND when he heard that John was delivered up, he departed to
Galilee; [4:13]and leaving Nazareth he came and lived at Capernaum on
the lake, in the bounds of Zebulon and Naphtali, [4:14]that the word
might be fulfilled, spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying; [4:15]Land of
Zebulon and Naphtali, by the way of the lake, beyond the Jordan,
Galilee of the nations, [4:16]the people who sat in darkness have seen
a great light, and upon those who sat in the region and shade of death
has light arisen.  [4:17]From that time Jesus began to preach, and to
say, Change your minds; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

2 [4:18]And walking by the lake of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon,
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the lake, for
they were fishermen. [4:19]And he said to them, Come after me, and I
will make you fishermen of men. [4:20]And they left their nets,
immediately, and followed him. [4:21]And going forward thence, he saw
two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in
the ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called
them. [4:22]And they immediately left the ship and their father, and
followed him.

3 [4:23]And he went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and
every infirmity among the people. [4:24]And his fame went out into all
Syria; and they brought him all that were ill, afflicted with various
diseases and torments, and demoniacs, and lunatics, and paralytics, and
he cured them; [4:25] and great multitudes followed him from Galilee,
and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond the Jordan.




