CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST AT BETHANY, THE CONSPIRACY OF JUDAS, THE PASCHAL AND LORD'S SUPPER, ETC.


1 [14:1]AND after two days was the passover and the unleavened bread.
And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might take him by
deception, and kill him. [14:2]But they said, Not at the feast, lest
there be a tumult of the people. [14:3]And when he was at Bethany, and
was reclining at the house of Simon the leper, a woman came, having a
vase of ointment of genuine nard, extremely costly, and breaking the
vase she poured it out on his head.

2 [14:4]And some were displeased, [and said] to themselves, Why was
this waste of the ointment? [14:5]For this ointment could have been
sold for more than three hundred denarii [$42] and given to the poor;
and they blamed her. [14:6] But Jesus said, Let her alone; why do you
trouble her? She has performed a good work on me. [14:7]The poor you
have always with you, and you can do them good when you will; but me
you have not always. [14:8]She has done what she could. She anticipated
anointing my body for the burial. [14:9]I tell you truly, that wherever
this good news shall be preached in all the world, this also which she
has done shall be told for a memorial of her.

3 [14:10]And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief
priests to betray him to them. [14:11]And when they heard him they were
glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might betray
him at a convenient time.

4 [14:12]And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said to him, Where do you wish us to go and
prepare to eat the passover? [14:13]And he sent two of his disciples,
and said to them, Go into the city, and a man shall meet you bearing an
earthen pitcher of water. Follow him, [14:14]and where he enters in,
say to the master of the house, The teacher says, where is the public
room in which I may eat the passover with my disciples? [14:15]And he
will show you a large upper room, furnished, ready; and there prepare
for us.  [14:16]And his disciples went out, and came into the city, and
found as he had said to them, and prepared the passover.

5 [14:17]And when it was evening he came, with the twelve, [14:18]And
as they reclined, and were eating, Jesus said, I tell you truly, that
one of you who eats with me will betray me.  [14:19]And they were
sorry, and said to him, one by one, Is it I?  And another, Is it I?
[14:20]And he said to them, It is one of the twelve who dips with me in
the dish. [14:21]The Son of man goes indeed as it is written of him,
but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would be
good for him if that man had not been born.

6 [14:22]And as they eat he took the bread, and having blessed, broke
and, gave to them, and said, Take, this is my body.  [14:23]And he took
the cup, and having given thanks gave them, and they all drank of it.
[14:24]And he said to them, This is my blood of the covenant, which is
poured out for many. [14:25]I tell you truly, that I will drink of the
product of the vine no more till that day when I drink it new in the
kingdom of God.  [14:26]And having sung a hymn they went out to the
Mount of Olives.




