CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST AT THE MOUNT OF OLIVES, AND IN GETHSEMANE.


1 [14:27]AND Jesus said to them, You will all be offended; for it is
written, I will smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered;
[14:28]but after I am raised I will go before you into Galilee.
[14:29]But Peter said to him, Even if all should be offended, yet I
will not. [14:30]And Jesus said to him, I tell you truly, that to-day,
on this night, before the cock crows twice, you will deny me thrice.
[14:31]And he said, more strongly, If it should be necessary for me to
die with you I will by no means deny you; and they all said the same.

2 [14:32]And they came to a place which was called Gethsemane; and he
said to his disciples, Sit here, till I pray. [14:33]And he took Peter,
and James, and John with him, and began to be amazed and dejected.
[14:34]And he said to them, My soul is extremely sorrowful, even to
death; remain here and watch.  [14:35] And going forward a little he
fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it was possible, the hour might
pass away from him. [14:36]And he said, Abba, father, all things are
possible to thee. Take away this cup from me; but not what I will but
what thou wilt. [14:37]And he came and found them sleeping, and said to
Peter, Simon, do you sleep? Could you not watch one hour?  [14:38]Watch
and pray that you enter not into trial; the spirit indeed is willing,
but flesh is weak. [14:39]And again going away he prayed, saying the
same words. [14:40]And again coming he found them sleeping; for their
eyes were heavy; and they knew not what to answer him. [14:41]And he
came a third time, and said to them, Sleep henceforth, and be
refreshed. It is enough; the hour has come. Behold, the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners! [14:42]arise, let us go; behold, he
that betrays me is at hand!

3 [14:43]And immediately, while he was yet speaking, Judas the
Iscariot, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude, with
swords and clubs, from the chief priests, and scribes, and elders.
[14:44]And the traitor had given them this signal, saying, Whom I shall
kiss, he is the one; take him, and lead him away safely. [14:45]And
coming, he immediately approached him, and said, Rabbi! Rabbi! and
kissed him.  [14:46]And they laid hands on him and took him.

4 [14:47]And one of those who stood by drew a sword and struck the
servant of the chief priest, and cut off his car. [14:48]And Jesus
answered and said to them, Have you come out as against a robber, with
swords and clubs to apprehend me? [14:49]I was daily with you in the
temple teaching, and you did not take me. But [it was done] that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled. [14:50]And all forsook him and fled.
[14:51]And one young man followed him with a linen cloth wrapped about
his naked body. And the young men caught him; [14:52]and leaving the
linen cloth he escaped from them naked.




