CHAPTER XV. CHRIST BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM, AND BEFORE PILATE.


1 [14:53]AND they led away Jesus to the chief priest; and all the chief
priests, and elders, and scribes came together to him.  [14:54]And
Peter followed him at a distance, till he came into the court of the
chief priest; and he sat with the officers and warmed himself before
the light. [14:55]And the chief priests and all the Sanhedrim sought
testimony against Jesus to kill him, and did not find it. [14:56]For
many testified falsely against him, but their testimony did not agree;
[14:57]and some arose and testified falsely against him, saying,
[14:58]We heard him say, I will destroy this temple made with hands,
and in three days will build another made without hands. [14:59]And
neither in this did their testimony agree. [14:60]And the chief priest
standing up in the midst asked Jesus, saying, Do you not answer any
thing to what these testify against you? [14:61]And he was silent, and
answered nothing.

2 Again the chief priest asked him, and said to him, Are you the
Christ, the Son of the Blessed? [14:62]And Jesus said, I am; and you
shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the power, and
coming with the clouds of heaven. [14:63]And the high priest rent his
clothes, and said, What further need have we of witnesses? [14:64]You
have heard the blasphemy; what do you think? And they all condemned him
to be deserving of death.  [14:65]And some spit on him; and they
blindfolded him, and beat him with the fist, and said to him, Prophesy.
And the officers beat him with open hands.

3 [14:66]And Peter being in the court below, one of the female servants
of the chief priest came, [14:67]and seeing Peter warming himself,
looked at him, and said, You also were with Jesus the Nazarene.
[14:68]But he denied it, saying, I do not know [him]; neither do I know
what you say. And he went out into the porch, and a cock crew.
[14:69]And the female servant seeing him said to those standing by,
This is one of them. [14:70]But he again denied it. And after a short
time those standing by again said to Peter, You are certainly one of
them, for you are also a Galilean. [14:71]And he cursed and swore, I
know not this man of whom you speak. [14:72]And a cock crew a second
time. And Peter was reminded of the word, how Jesus said to him, Before
a cock crows twice, you will deny me thrice. And he wept bitterly.

4 [15:1]And immediately in the morning, the chief priests taking
counsel with the elders, and scribes, and all the Sanhedrim, bound
Jesus, and brought and delivered him to Pilate. [15:2]And Pilate asked
him, Are you the king of the Jews? And Jesus answered and said to him,
As you say. [15:3]And the chief priests accused him of many things.
[15:4]And Pilate again asked him saying, Do you answer nothing? see how
many things they charge against you. [15:5]And Jesus answered him not
any more; so that Pilate wondered.

5 [15:6]And at the feast he released to them a prisoner, whomsoever
they chose. [15:7]And there was a man called Barabbas, bound with the
insurgents, who had committed murder in a sedition. [15:8]And the
multitude went up and requested as he had always done to them.
[15:9]And Pilate answered them, saying, Do you wish me to release to
you the king of the Jews? [15:10]For he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him up from envy.  [15:11]But the chief priests moved the
people that he should rather release Barabbas to them.

6 [15:12]And Pilate again answered and said to them, What, then, do you
wish me to do to him whom you call the king of the Jews?  [15:13]And
they cried again, Crucify him! [15:14]And Pilate said to them, [Why]?
for what evil has he done? But they cried more violently, Crucify him!
[15:15]And Pilate wishing to satisfy the multitude released to them
Barabbas; and having scourged Jesus delivered him up to be crucified.




