CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST CRUCIFIED, HIS DEATH, BURIAL AND RESURRECTION.


1 [15:16]AND the soldiers led him away into the court which is the
Praetorium, and called together all the cohort. [15:17]And they put on
him a purple garment, and plaiting a thorny crown put it on him.
[15:18]And they saluted him, Hail, king of the Jews!  [15:19]And they
struck his head with a reed, and beat him, and kneeling down worshipped
him. [15:20]And when they had mocked him they took off the purple
garment, and put on him his own clothes, and they led him away to
crucify him, [15:21]and compelled one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was
passing along, coming from the country, the father of Alexander and
Rufus, to bear his cross.

2 [15:22]And they brought him to Golgotha, which is interpreted A place
of a cranium, [15:23]and gave him wine mingled with myrrh; but he did
not take it. [15:24]And they crucified him, and divided his clothes,
casting lots for them which should take any thing. [15:25]And it was
the third hour when they crucified him, [15:26]and the inscription of
his accusation was written, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

3 [15:27]And they crucified with him two robbers, one on his right hand
and the other on his left. [15:29]And those who passed by reviled him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Aha, you that destroy the temple and
build it in three days! [15:30]save yourself, and come down from the
cross. [15:31]In like manner also the chief priests mocking him, with
the scribes, said one to another, He saved others; himself he cannot
save; [15:32]let the Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the
cross, that we may see and believe. And those crucified with him
reproached him.

4 [15:33]And when it was the sixth hour, there was darkness over all
the earth till the ninth hour. [15:34]And at the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, Eloi! Eloi! lama sabachthani? which is
interpreted, my God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me? [15:35]And some
of those standing by, hearing him, said, See, he calls Elijah.
[15:36]And one ran, and filled a sponge with vinegar, and putting it on
a reed gave it to him to drink, saying, Let him alone; let us see if
Elijah will come to take him down.

5 [15:37]And Jesus crying with a loud voice, expired. [15:38]And the
vail of the temple was rent in two, from top to bottom; [15:39]and the
centurion who stood near, opposite to him, seeing that he so expired,
said, Truly, this man was a Son of God.

6 [15:40]And the women also saw from afar, among whom were Mary the
Magdalene and Mary the mother of James the less, and of Joset, and
Salome, [15:41]who also followed him when he was in Galilee, and waited
on him, and many others who had come up with him to Jerusalem.

7 [15:42]And when it was now evening, because it was the preparation,
which is before the sabbath, [15:43]Joseph came, who was from
Arimathea, an honorable counsellor, who also himself expected the
kingdom of God, and went in boldly to Pilate and asked for the body of
Jesus. [15:44]And Pilate wondered that he was already dead; and calling
the centurion asked him if he had been dead for some time. [15:45]And
knowing [his death,] from the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
[15:46]And having bought linen, he took him down and wrapped him in the
linen, and placed him in a tomb which was cut from a rock, and rolled a
stone against the door of the tomb. [15:47]And Mary the Magdalene and
Mary the mother of Joset saw where he was laid.

8 [16:1]And when the sabbath was passed, Mary the Magdalene and Mary
the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might come
and anoint him. [16:2] And very early in the morning, on the first day
of the week, they came to the tomb at the rising of the sun. [16:3]And
they said to themselves, Who will roll away the stone for us from the
door of the tomb?-- [16:4]and looking up they saw that the stone was
rolled away--for it was very great.

9 [16:5]And coming to the tomb they saw a young man sitting on the
right side, clothed with a white robe; and they were astonished.
[16:6]And he said to them, Be not astonished; you seek Jesus the
Nazarene, who was crucified. He is raised; he is not here. See the
place where they laid him. [16:7]But go, tell his disciples and Peter
that he goes before you to Galilee; there you shall see him as he said
to you. [16:8]And they went out and fled from the tomb; and trembling
and amazement seized them; and they said nothing to any one, for they
were afraid.




