THE GOSPEL OF LUKE. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION, AND THE TWO ANNUNCIATIONS.


1 [1:1]SINCE many have undertaken to arrange a complete digest of the
things fully believed among us, [1:2]as they delivered them to us who,
from the beginning, were eye witnesses and ministers of the word,
[1:3]it seemed good to me also, having traced all things accurately
from the first, to write in order to you, most excellent Theophilus,
[1:4]that you may know the certainty of the words concerning which you
have been taught.

2 [1:5]In the days of Herod the king of Judea, there was a certain
priest by the name of Zachariah, of the class of Abijah; and his wife
was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. [1:6]And
they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord blameless.  [1:7] And they had no son,
because Elizabeth was barren, and both were advanced in years.

3 [1:8]And when he was performing the priest's office in the order of
his class before God, it fell to his lot, [1:9]according to the custom
of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the Lord to burn incense;
[1:10]and all the multitude of the people were praying without, at the
hour of incense. [1:11]And an angel of the Lord appeared to him,
standing on the right side of the altar of incense; [1:12]and Zachariah
was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.

4 [1:13]And the angel said to him, Fear not, Zachariah, for your prayer
is heard, and your wife Elizabeth shall bear you a son; and you shall
call his name John. [1:14]And he shall be to you a joy and rejoicing;
and many shall rejoice at his birth; [1:15]for he shall be great in the
sight of the Lord, and shall not drink wine and strong drink, but shall
be filled with the Holy Spirit even from his birth; [1:16]and many of
the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. [1:17]And
he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the
hearts of fathers to children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the
righteous, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. [1:18] And
Zachariah said to the angel, By what shall I know this? for I am an old
man, and my wife advanced in years. [1:19]And the angel answered and
said to him, I am Gabriel, who stand before God; and I was sent to
speak to you, and to tell you this good news.  [1:20]And behold you
shall be silent, and not able to speak, till the day these things are
accomplished; because you have not believed my words, which shall be
fulfilled in their time.

5 [1:21]And the people waited for Zachariah, and wondered that he staid
so long in the temple. [1:22]And when he came out he could not speak to
them; and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. And
he made signs to them, and continued dumb.  [1:23]And when the days of
his service were completed he departed to his house. [1:24]And after
these days Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and hid herself five
months, saying, [1:25]Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the days in
which he looked upon me to take away my reproach among men.

6 [1:26]And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a
city of Galilee, by the name of Nazareth, [1:27]to a virgin espoused to
a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the name of the
virgin was Mary. [1:28]And coming in to her, he said, Hail, favored
one! The Lord is with you! [1:29]And she was troubled at his word, and
doubted what this salutation meant.  [1:30]And the angel said to her,
Fear not, Mary, for you have found favor with God. [1:31]And behold you
shall be with child, and bear a son, and shall call his name Jesus.
[1:32]He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High.
And the Lord God shall give him the throne of David his father,
[1:33]and he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

7 [1:34]And Mary said to the angel, How shall this be, since I know not
a man? [1:35]And the angel answered and said to her, The Holy Spirit
shall come upon you, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow
you; and on that account the holy child shall be called the Son of God.
[1:36]And behold Elizabeth, your relative, even she is pregnant with a
son in her old age, and this is the sixth month to her called barren;
[1:37]for nothing is impossible with God. [1:38] And Mary said, Behold,
I am the servant of the Lord! Let it be to me according to your word.
And the angel departed from her.




