CHAPTER III. THE BIRTH OF CHRIST, HIS INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD.


1 [2:1]In those days there went out an ordinance from Caesar Augustus
that a census should be taken of all the world.  [2:2]This first census
was taken when Cyrenius was proconsul of Syria. [2:3]And all went to be
enrolled, each one to his own city. [2:4]And Joseph went up from
Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David,
which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of
David, [2:5]to be enrolled with Mary his espoused [wife,] who was with
child. [2:6]And while they were there the days for her delivery were
completed; [2:7]and she bore her first-born son, and wrapped him in
bandages, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the khan.

2 [2:8]And there were shepherds in that country staying in the fields
and watching their flock by night. [2:9]And behold, an angel of the
Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and
they were greatly afraid. [2:10]And the angel said to them, Fear not;
for, behold, I bring you good news of a great joy, which shall be for
all people. [2:11]For to you was born to-day in the city of David, a
Saviour who is the anointed Lord. [2:12]And this shall be a sign to
you. You shall find the babe wrapped in bandages, lying in a manger.
[2:13]And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host, praising God, and saying, [2:14]Glory to God in the highest
[heavens], on earth peace, and among men good will!

3 [2:15]And when the angels had departed from them to heaven, the
shepherds said one to another, Let us go now to Bethlehem, and see this
thing which has occurred, which the Lord has made known to us.
[2:16]And they came in haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe
lying in the manger. [2:17]And when they saw it they related the word
spoken to them concerning this child; [2:18] and all who heard wondered
at the things told them by the shepherds.  [2:19]But Mary kept all
these words, revolving them in her mind.  [2:20]And the shepherds
returned, glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and
seen, as it was told them.

4 [2:21]And when eight days were completed, [the time] to circumcise
him, his name was called Jesus, the name given him by the angel before
he was conceived in the womb. [2:22]And when the days of their
purification were completed according to the law of Moses, they carried
him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, [2:23]as it is written
in the law of the Lord that every male which is a first born shall be
called holy to the Lord, [2:24]and to offer a sacrifice according to
what is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtle doves, or two
young pigeons.

5 [2:25]And behold, there was a man at Jerusalem whose name was Simeon;
and this man was just and pious, waiting for the consolation of Israel,
and the Holy Spirit was on him. [2:26]And he was informed by the Holy
Spirit that he should not see death till he had seen the Lord's
anointed. [2:27]And he came by the spirit into the temple, and when the
parents brought in the child Jesus, to do according to the custom of
the law concerning him, [2:28]he also took it in his arms, and blessed
God, and said, [2:29]Now, Master, dismiss thy servant according to thy
word, in peace; [2:30]for my eyes have seen thy salvation, [2:31]which
thou hast prepared before all people; [2:32]a light for enlightening
Gentiles, and a glory of thy people Israel.  [2:33]And his father and
mother wondered at the words spoken of him.

6 [2:34]And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is set for the fall and rise of many in Israel, and for a
sign spoken against, [2:35]and a sword shall pierce your own soul also,
that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.

7 [2:36]And there was Anna, a prophetess, a daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asher; she was far advanced in years, having lived with a
husband seven years from her virginity; [2:37]and she had been a widow
eighty-four years, and departed not from the temple, serving God night
and day with fastings and prayers.  [2:38]And she coming by at that
time, praised God, and spoke of him [the child] to all who expected a
redemption in Jerusalem.  [2:39]And when they had finished all things
according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their
city Nazareth.  [2:40]And the little child grew, and became strong,
being filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon it.

8 [2:41]And his parents went up yearly to Jerusalem to the feast of the
passover. [2:42]And when he was twelve years old they went up to
Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast. [2:43]And having
completed the days, on their return, the child Jesus remained behind at
Jerusalem. And his parents knew it not.  [2:44]But supposing that he
was in the company went a day's journey and sought him among their
relations and acquaintances.  [2:45]And not finding him they returned
to Jerusalem to seek him.  [2:46]And after three days they found him
sitting in the temple in the midst of the teachers, both hearing and
questioning them.  [2:47]And all who heard him were astonished at his
understanding and his answers.

9 [2:48]And when they saw him they were astonished; and his mother said
to him, Son, why have you dealt thus with us? Behold, your father and I
have sought you with sorrow. [2:49]And he said to them, Why did you
seek me? did you not know that I must be in [the courts] of my father?
[2:50]And they understood not the word which he spoke to them.
[2:51]And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject
to them. And his mother kept all these things in her heart. [2:52]And
Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.




