CHAPTER V. CHRIST'S FASTING, TEMPTATION, AND THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS MINISTRY.


1 [4:1]AND Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan,
and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness, [4:2]being tempted by the
devil forty days. And he eat nothing in those days; and when they were
completed he was hungry. [4:3]And the devil said to him, If you are the
Son of God, command this stone to become bread. [4:4]And Jesus answered
him, It is written, that man shall not live by bread alone. [4:5]And
taking him up he showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment
of time.  [4:6]And the devil said to him, All this power will I give
you, and the glory of these; for it is given to me, and I give it to
whom I will. [4:7]If you, therefore, will worship me, it all shall be
yours. [4:8]And Jesus answered and said to him, It is written, You
shall worship the Lord your God, and him alone shall you serve.
[4:9]And he brought him to Jerusalem and placed him on the pinnacle of
the temple, and said to him, If you are the Son of God, cast yourself
down from here; [4:10]for it is written, He will charge his angels
concerning you, to guard you, [4:11]and they shall bear you up on their
hands, lest at any time you dash your foot against a stone. [4:12]And
Jesus answered and said to him, It is said, You shall not try the Lord
your God. [4:13]And the devil having finished all the temptation,
departed from him for a time.

2 [4:14]And Jesus returned with the power of the Spirit to Galilee; and
his fame went out into all the region around.  [4:15]And he taught in
their synagogues, glorified by all.

3 [4:16]And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up, and entered,
according to his custom on the sabbath day, into the synagogue, and
stood up to read. [4:17]And the book of Isaiah the prophet was given to
him. And unrolling the book he found the place where it was written,
[4:18]The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach good news to the poor; he has sent me to proclaim a release to
the captives, and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the
oppressed away free, [4:19]to proclaim an acceptable year of the Lord.
[4:20]And folding up the book, he gave it to the minister, and sat
down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were steadfastly fixed upon
him.

4 [4:21]And he said to them, To-day is this scripture fulfilled in your
ears. [4:22]And they all bore him witness, and wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded from his mouth, and said, Is not this the son of
Joseph? [4:23]And he said to them, You will undoubtedly tell me this
proverb; Physician, cure yourself; things which we heard were done in
Capernaum, do also here in your own country. [4:24]And he said, I tell
you truly, that no prophet is acceptable in his own country. [4:25]I
also tell you of a truth, that there were many widows in Israel in the
days of Elijah, when heaven was shut up three years and six months, so
that there was a great famine over all the land; [4:26]and to none of
them was Elijah sent, but to Sarepta, of Sidon, to a widow woman.
[4:27]And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the
prophet, and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian. [4:28]And
all in the synagogue when they heard these things were filled with
wrath; [4:29]and they arose and cast him out of the city, and led him
even to the brow of the mountain on which the city was built, to
precipitate him down.  [4:30]But he passed through the midst of them
and went away.




