CHAPTER V. CHRIST'S SERMON ON THE MOUNT.


1 [5:1]AND seeing the multitudes, he went on the mountain and sat down;
and his disciples came to him. [5:2]And he opened his mouth and taught
them, saying; [5:3]Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. [5:5] Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth. [5:4]Blessed are those that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. [5:6]Blessed are those that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for they shall be filled.  [5:7]Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.  [5:8]Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God.  [5:9]Blessed are the peace makers, for
they shall be called children of God. [5:10]Blessed are the persecuted
for righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. [5:11]Blessed
are you when they shall reproach you, and persecute you, and say every
evil against you, falsely, for my sake. [5:12] Rejoice and exult, for
great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who
were before you.

2 [5:13]You are the salt of the earth; but if the salt has lost its
strength, with what shall it be seasoned? It is good for nothing more,
except being cast out to be trodden upon by men.  [5:14]You are the
light of the world. A city situated on a mountain cannot be hid.
[5:15]Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a modius [1.916
gallon measure], but on a candlestick, and it shines to all in the
house. [5:16]Let your light so shine before men that they may see your
good works, and glorify your father in heaven. [5:17]Think not that I
have come to destroy the law or the prophets; I have not come to
destroy but to complete. [5:18]For I tell you truly, that till heaven
and earth pass away, one iota or one point shall by no means pass away
from the law till all things are accomplished. [5:19]Whoever therefore
shall break one of the least of these commandments, and teach men so,
shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever shall do
and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. [5:20]For
I tell you, that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes
and Pharisees, you shall by no means enter into the kingdom of heaven.

3 [5:21]You have heard that it was said by the ancients, You shall not
kill; and whoever kills shall be subject to the judgment. [5:22]But I
tell you, that every one who is angry with his brother shall be subject
to the judgment; and whoever says to his brother, Worthless fellow,
shall be subject to the Sanhedrim; and whoever says, You fool, shall be
subject to the hell of fire.  [5:23]If, therefore, you offer your gift
on the altar, and there remember that your brother has any thing
against you, [5:24]leave there your gift before the altar, and go and
first be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.
[5:25]Agree with your accuser quickly, while you are with him in the
way, lest the accuser deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver
you to the officer, and you be cast into prison. [5:26]I tell you
truly, you shall not go out thence till you have paid the last quadrans
[4 mills].

4 [5:27]You have heard that it was said, You shall not commit adultery;
[5:28] but I tell you, that every one who looks on a woman to desire
her inordinately, has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
[5:29]But if your right eye offends you, pluck it out and cast it from
you; for it is better for you that one of your members should perish,
and not that your whole body should be cast into hell. [5:30]And if
your right hand offends you, cut it off and cast it from you; for it is
better for you that one of your members should perish, and not that
your whole body should go into hell. [5:31]And it was said, Whoever
would put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorcement. [5:32]
But I tell you, that whoever puts away his wife, except for adultery,
causes her to commit adultery; and whoever marries her that is put
away, commits adultery. [5:33]Again, you have heard that it was said by
the ancients, You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform to the
Lord your oaths. [5:34]But I tell you, Swear not at all; neither by
heaven, for it is God's throne; [5:35]nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King;
[5:36]nor swear by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or
black.  [5:37]But let your speech be, yes, yes, and no, no; for any
thing more than this is evil.

5 [5:38]You have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth. [5:39]But I tell you not to resist the evil man; but
whoever shall strike you on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also; [5:40]and if a man wishes to have a law suit with you, and take
away your coat, let him have your cloak also; [5:41]and whoever shall
compel you to go one mile, go two miles with him. [5:42]Give to him
that asks, and from him that would borrow of you turn not away.
[5:43]You have heard that it was said, You shall love your neighbor,
and hate your enemy.  [5:44]But I tell you, Love your enemies, and pray
for those that persecute you; [5:45]that you may be children of your
Father in heaven; for he causes his sun to rise on the evil and the
good, and rains on the just and unjust. [5:46]For if you love those
that love you, what reward have you? Do not the publicans the same?
[5:47]And if you salute your brothers only, what do you do more than
[others]? Do not the gentiles also do the same?  [5:48]Be therefore
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

6 [6:1]But take heed not to perform your righteousness before men, to
be seen by them; otherwise indeed, you have no reward from your Father
in heaven. [6:2] When, therefore, you give in charity, sound not a
trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues and in the
streets, that they may be glorified by men. I tell you truly, they have
their reward. [6:3]But when you give in charity let not your left hand
know what your right hand does, [6:4]that your charity may be in
secret; and your Father who sees in secret shall reward you.

7 [6:5]And when you pray, be not like the hypocrites; for they love to
pray standing in the synagogues, and at the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen by men. I tell you truly, they have their reward.
[6:6]But when you pray enter into your private room, and having shut
your door pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who
sees in secret shall reward you.  [6:7]And when you pray use not vain
repetitions, as the gentiles do; for they think they shall be heard for
their much speaking.  [6:8]Be not, therefore, like them; for your
Father knows what you need before you ask him. [6:9]Pray, therefore,
thus; Our Father in heaven, hallowed be thy name; [6:10]thy kingdom
come; thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth; [6:11]give us to-day
our essential bread, [6:12]and forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors; [6:13]and bring us not into trial, but deliver us from evil.
[6:14]For if you forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will
forgive you; [6:15]but if you forgive not men, neither will your Father
forgive your offenses.

8 [6:16]And when you fast, be not like the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance; for they disfigure their faces that they may appear to men
to fast. I tell you truly, they have their reward.  [6:17]But when you
fast, anoint your head, and wash your face, [6:18]that you may not
appear to men to fast, but to your Father in secret; and your Father
who sees in secret shall reward you.

9 [6:19]Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where a moth
and corrosion destroy, and where thieves dig through and steal.
[6:20]But lay up treasures for yourselves in heaven, where neither a
moth nor corrosion destroys, and where thieves dig not through nor
steal; [6:21]for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

10 [6:22]The light of the body is the eye. If, therefore, your eye is
sound, your whole body will be light; [6:23]but if your eye is evil,
your whole body will be dark. If, therefore, the light which is in you
is darkness, how great is the darkness!  [6:24]No one can serve two
masters; for either he will hate the first, and love the other, or he
will adhere to the first, and despise the other. You cannot serve God
and riches. [6:25]On this account I tell you, be not anxious for your
soul, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; nor for your body,
what you shall put on, is not the soul more than food, and the body
more than clothing? [6:26]Look at the birds of heaven; they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into store-houses; but your heavenly
Father feeds them. Are you not much better than they?  [6:27]Which of
you by being anxious can add one cubit to his stature? [6:28]And why
are you anxious concerning clothing?  Consider the lilies of the field,
how they grow; they perform no hard labor, neither do they spin;
[6:29]but I tell you that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these.  [6:30]And if God so clothes the grass of the field,
which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, will he not much
more clothe you, men of little faith? [6:31]Be not anxious, therefore,
saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or with what shall
we be clothed? [6:32]For after all these things the gentiles seek; and
your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. [6:33]But
seek first righteousness and his kingdom, and all these things shall be
added to you. [6:34]Be not anxious, therefore, for to-morrow, for
to-morrow will be anxious for its; sufficient for the day is its evil.

11 [7:1]Judge not, that you be not judged; [7:2]for with what judgment
you judge you shall be judged; and with what measure you measure it
shall be measured to you. [7:3]And why do you see a speck in your
brother's eye, and not consider a beam in your own eye? [7:4]or how
will you say to your brother, Let me cast out the speck from your eye,
and behold a beam in your own eye? [7:5] Hypocrite, cast out first the
beam from your eye, and then will you see clearly to cast out the speck
from your brother's eye.  [7:6]Give not a holy thing to dogs, neither
cast your pearls before swine, lest they tread them down with their
feet, and turn and rend you. [7:7]Ask, and it shall be given you. Seek,
and you shall find. Knock, and it shall be opened to you. [7:8]For
every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. [7:9]Or is there any man of you, who,
if his son asks bread of him, will give him a stone?  [7:10]or if he
asks a fish, will give him a serpent? [7:11]If you then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your
Father in heaven give good gifts to them that ask him. [7:12]All
things, therefore, which you wish men to do to you, do also thus to
them; for this is the law and the prophets.

12 [7:13]Enter in through the narrow gate, for wide is the gate; and
spacious the way which leads to destruction, and many are they that
enter in by it; [7:14]for narrow is the gate, and compressed the way
which leads to life, and few are those who find it. [7:15]But beware of
false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but within they
are rapacious wolves. [7:16]You shall know them by their fruits. Do men
gather grapes from thorns? or figs from thistles? [7:17]So every good
tree bears good fruits, but a bad tree bears bad fruits; [7:18]a good
tree cannot bear bad fruits, nor a bad tree good fruits. [7:19] Every
tree which bears not good fruit is cut down and cast into the fire.
[7:20] By their fruits, therefore, you shall know them.

13 [7:21]Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father in
heaven. [7:22]Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in your name, and in your name cast out demons, and in your
name performed many mighty works?  [7:23]and then will I confess to
them, I never knew you; depart from me you that commit wickedness.

14 [7:24]Every one, therefore, that hears these words of mine and
performs them, I will liken to a wise man who built his house on the
rock; [7:25]and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew and beat on that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on the
rock. [7:26]And every one who hears these words of mine and performs
them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, who built his house on the
sand; [7:27]and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew and beat on that house, and it fell; and its fall was great.
[7:28]And when Jesus had finished these words the multitudes were
astonished at his teaching; [7:29]for he taught them as having
authority, and not as their scribes.




