CHAPTER VI. CHRIST AT CAPERNAUM, AND HIS PREACHING AND MIRACLES IN GALILEE.


1 [4:31]AND he went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught
them on the sabbath; [4:32]and they were astonished at his teaching,
for his word was with power. [4:33]And there was a man in the synagogue
having a spirit of an impure demon; and he cried with a loud voice,
[4:34]Alas! what have you to do with us, Jesus Nazarene? Have you come
to destroy us? I know you who you are, the Holy [Son] of God! [4:35]And
Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hush!  and come out of him. And the demon
casting him into the midst came out of him, doing him no injury.
[4:36]And they were all amazed, and talked with each other, saying,
What word is this, that with authority and power he commands the impure
spirits, and they come out? [4:37]And a report of him went abroad into
every place in the country about.

2 [4:38]And going up from the synagogue he entered into the house of
Simon. And Simon's mother-in-law was sick with a violent fever; and
they asked him in her behalf. [4:39]And standing over her he rebuked
the fever, and it left her. And she immediately arose and waited on
them.

3 [4:40]And when the sun went down, all who had friends sick with
various diseases brought them to him; and putting his hands on each one
of them he cured them; [4:41]and demons also went out of many, crying
and saying, You are the Son of God! And he rebuked them, and charged
them not to say that they knew him to be the Christ.

4 [4:42]And when it was day, coming out he went to a solitary place;
and the multitudes sought him, and came to him, and urged him not to
depart from them. [4:43]But he said to them, I must preach the good
news of the kingdom of God in the other cities also, because for this
am I sent; [4:44]and he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

5 [5:1]And as the multitude pressed upon him to hear the word of God,
and he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret, [5:2]he saw two boats
standing by the lake; and the fishermen having gone out of them were
washing their nets. [5:3] And entering into one of the ships, which was
Simon's, he asked him to put out a little from the land, and sat down
and taught the multitudes from the ship. [5:4]And when he ceased
speaking, he said to Simon, Put out into the deep water, and let down
your nets for a draught.  [5:5]And Simon answered and said to him,
Master, we have labored all night and taken nothing; but at your word I
will let down the net. [5:6]And doing this he enclosed a great number
of fishes; and their net broke. [5:7]And he made signs to his
companions in the other ship to come and help him; and they came, and
filled both ships, so that they began to sink. [5:8]And Simon Peter
seeing it fell on his knees to Jesus, saying, Depart from me, Lord, for
I am a sinful man. [5:9]For he was amazed, and all that were with him,
at the draught of fishes which they had taken.  [5:10]So also were
James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And
Jesus said to Simon, Fear not; from this time you shall take men.
[5:11]And bringing the ships to the land they left all and followed him.

6 [5:12]And he was in one of the cities, and behold, a man full of
leprosy; and seeing Jesus he fell on his face, and asked him, saying,
Lord, if you will, you can cleanse me. [5:13]And stretching out his
hand he touched him, saying, I will; be cleansed. And immediately the
leprosy left him. [5:14]And he charged him to tell no one, but go and
show yourself to the priest, and present an offering for your
purification, as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. [5:15]And
the report concerning him went abroad extensively; and great multitudes
came together to hear him, and to be cured of their diseases. [5:16]
And he withdrew into solitary places and prayed.




