CHAPTER VII. CHRIST FORGIVING SINS, CALLING LEVI, EATING WITH PUBLICANS AND SINNERS, AND EXPOUNDING THE LAWS OF FASTING AND THE SABBATH.


1 [5:17]AND on one of those days he was teaching, and the Pharisees and
teachers of the law were present, having come from every village of
Galilee, and of Judea, and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord
was present to cure them. [5:18]And behold, men bringing on a bed a man
who was paralytic; and they sought to bring him in to place him before
him. [5:19]And not finding how they could bring him in, on account of
the multitude, they went up on the house, and let him down through the
tiles, with his little bed, into the midst before Jesus. [5:20]And
seeing their faith, he said, Man, your sins are forgiven you.

2 [5:21]And the scribes and Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is
this that speaks blasphemies? who can forgive sins, but God alone?
[5:22]And Jesus knowing their thoughts answered and said to them, Why
do you reason in your minds? [5:23]in what is it easier to say, Your
sins are forgiven you, than to say, Arise and walk? [5:24]But that you
may know that the Son of man has power on the earth to forgive sins, he
said to the paralytic, I tell you, arise, and take up your little bed,
and go to your house. [5:25]And he arose immediately before them, and
taking up that on which he had lain departed to his house, glorifying
God.  [5:26]And all were astonished, and glorified God, and were filled
with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to-day.

3 [5:27]And after these things he went out and saw a publican by the
name of Levi, sitting at the custom house, and said to him, Follow me.
[5:28]And leaving all he arose and followed him.  [5:29]And Levi made a
great feast for him at his house; and there was a great multitude of
publicans and of others who reclined with them. [5:30]And the Pharisees
and their scribes complained to his disciples, saying, Why do you eat
and drink with publicans? [5:31]And Jesus answered and said to them,
The well need not a physician, but the ill. [5:32]I have not come to
call the righteous, but sinners to a change of mind.

4 [5:33]And they said to him, The disciples of John fast much and make
prayers; and likewise those of the Pharisees; but yours eat and drink.
[5:34]And he said to them, Can you make the children of the
bridechamber fast while the bridegroom is with them?  [5:35]But days
will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them; then shall they
fast in those days.

5 [5:36]And he spoke also a parable to them; That no one puts a piece
of a new garment on an old garment; if he does, the new both tears the
old, and that from the new disagrees with the old.  [5:37]And no one
puts new wine into old bottles; if he does, the new wine will break the
bottles, and itself be poured out, and the bottles be destroyed.
[5:38]But new wine must be put into new bottles. [5:39]And no one
drinking old wine desires new; for he says the old is good.

6 [6:1]And on the second-first sabbath he went through the grain
fields, and his disciples picked the heads and eat, rubbing them in
their hands. [6:2]And some of the Pharisees said, Why do you do what is
not lawful on the sabbath? [6:3]And Jesus answered and said to them,
Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those with
him? [6:4]He entered into the house of God, and took the show bread,
and eat, and gave to those with him, which it was not lawful for any to
eat, except the priests alone. [6:5]And he said to them, The Son of man
is Lord even of the sabbath.

7 [6:6]And on another sabbath he went into the synagogue and taught.
And there was a man there whose right hand was withered.  [6:7]And the
scribes and Pharisees watched him [to see] if he would perform a cure
on the sabbath, that they might find [something of which] to accuse
him. [6:8]But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man having the
withered hand, Arise, and stand in the midst. And he arose and stood.
[6:9]And Jesus said to them, I will ask you whether it is lawful on the
sabbath to do good or to do evil? to save a life or to destroy?
[6:10]And looking round upon them all he said to him, Stretch out your
hand. And he did so; and his hand was restored. [6:11]And they were
filled with madness, and conferred with each other as to what they
should do to Jesus.




