CHAPTER VIII. CHRIST CALLING THE TWELVE APOSTLES.


1 [6:12]AND in those days he went out on the mountain to pray, and
spent the whole night in prayer to God. [6:13]And when it was day he
called his disciples; and having chosen twelve of them, whom he named
apostles, [6:14] Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his
brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, [6:15]Matthew and
Thomas, James, the son of Alpheus, and Simon called Zealot, [6:16]Judas
the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who was the traitor, [6:17]he
went down with them and stood on a plain; and a multitude of his
disciples, and a great multitude of the people from all Judea and
Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him,
and to be cured of their diseases; [6:18]and those troubled with impure
spirits were cured. [6:19]And all the multitude sought to touch him,
for a power went out from him and cured all.

2 [6:20]And he lifted up his eyes upon his disciples and said, Blessed
are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.  [6:21]Blessed are you
that hunger now, for you shall be filled.  Blessed are you that weep
now, for you shall laugh. [6:22]Blessed are you when men shall hate
you, and when they shall exclude you from their company, and reproach
and cast out your names as evil, on account of the Son of man.
[6:23]Rejoice in that day, and be exceedingly glad; for behold, your
reward is great in heaven. For in this manner did their fathers to the
prophets. [6:24]But woe to you rich! for you have your consolation.
[6:25]Woe to you full! for you shall be hungry. Woe to you who laugh
now! for you shall mourn and weep. [6:26]Woe, when all men speak well
of you!  for in this manner did their fathers of the false prophets.

3 [6:27]But I tell you that hear, Love your enemies; do good to those
that hate you; [6:28]bless those that curse you; pray for those that
injure you; [6:29] to him that strikes you on the cheek, present also
the other; and forbid not him who takes away your cloak to take your
coat also. [6:30]Give to every one that asks; and from him who takes
that which is yours, ask it not back. [6:31]And as you wish men to do
to you, do you also in like manner to them. [6:32]And if you love those
that love you, what thanks have you? for sinners also love those that
love them.  [6:33]And if you do good to those who do good to you, what
thanks have you? for sinners do the same. [6:34]And if you lend to
those from whom you hope to receive, what thanks have you? sinners also
lend to sinners, to receive back as much again. [6:35]But love your
enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing in return; and your
reward shall be great, and you shall be children of the Most High; for
he is good to the unthankful and evil.  [6:36]Be merciful, as your
father is merciful; [6:37]and judge not, and you shall not be judged;
and condemn not, and you shall not be condemned; release, and you shall
be released; [6:38]give, and it shall be given to you; good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, running over, shall they give into your
bosom. For with what measure you measure it shall be measured back to
you.

4 [6:39]And he spoke also a parable to them; Can the blind lead the
blind? Will not both fall into the pit? [6:40]A disciple is not above
his teacher, but every perfect one will be as his teacher. [6:41]And
why do you see the speck in your brother's eye, and observe not the
beam in your own eye? [6:42]How can you say to your brother, Brother,
let me cast out the speck in your eye, and you yourself see not the
beam in your own eye?  Hypocrite, cast out first the beam from your
eye, and then you will see clearly to cast out the speck from your
brother's eye.  [6:43]For there is no good tree which bears bad fruit,
nor, again, a bad tree which bears good fruit. [6:44]For every tree is
known by its own fruit. For they do not gather figs from thorns, nor do
they pick grapes from brambles. [6:45]The good man out of the good
treasury of his heart brings forth good, and the evil man out of the
evil brings forth evil; for out of the abundance of the heart its mouth
speaks.

5 [6:46]And why do you call me Lord! Lord! and do not what I say?
[6:47]Every one that comes to me, and hears my words and does them, I
will show you whom he is like. [6:48]He is like a man building a house,
who dug and went deep, and laid the foundation on the rock; and when
there was a flood, the stream beat against that house and could not
shake it, because it was built on a rock. [6:49]But he that hears and
does not, is like a man building a house on the earth, without a
foundation, against which the stream beat, and it fell immediately; and
the ruin of that house was great.




