CHAPTER IX. CHRIST AT CAPERNAUM AND NAIN, HIS REPLY TO JOHN THE BAPTIST, ETC.


1 [7:1]WHEN he had finished all his discourses in the hearing of the
people, he entered into Capernaum. [7:2]And a certain centurion's
servant, who was dear to him, was sick, and about to die; [7:3]and he
hearing of Jesus, sent to him the elders of the Jews, asking him to
come and cure his servant. [7:4]And having come to Jesus they besought
him earnestly, saying, He is worthy for whom you should do this;
[7:5]for he loves our nation, and has built us a synagogue. [7:6]And
Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the
centurion sent friends to him, saying, Lord, trouble not yourself, for
I am not fit that you should come under my roof. [7:7]Wherefore I did
not think myself worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my
servant shall be cured; [7:8] for I also am a man placed under
authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to one, Go, and he goes,
and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he
does it. [7:9]And Jesus hearing these things wondered at him, and
turning around said to the multitude following him, I tell you I have
not found in Israel so great a faith; [7:10]and those sent returning to
the house found the sick servant well.

2 [7:11]And on the next day he went to a city called Nain, and a
considerable number of his disciples and a great multitude went with
him. [7:12]And as he approached the gate of the city, behold, a dead
man was carried out, an only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
And a great multitude from the city was with her. [7:13]And seeing her,
the Lord had compassion on her, and said to her, Weep not. [7:14]And
approaching he touched the bier, and those who bore it stopped. And he
said, Young man, I tell you, arise! [7:15]And the dead sat up, and
began to speak; and he gave him to his mother. [7:16]And fear seized
all; and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet is raised up among
us; and, God has visited his people. [7:17]And this report of him went
out into all Judea, and into all the region around.

3 [7:18]And his disciples told John of all these things.  [7:19]And
calling two of his disciples, John sent to the Lord, saying, Are you he
that was to come, or look we for another?  [7:20]And coming to him the
men said, John the Baptist has sent us to you to say, Are you he that
was to come, or look we for another? [7:21]And in that hour he cured
many of diseases, and plagues, and of evil spirits, and gave sight to
many blind.  [7:22]And Jesus answered and said to them, Go and tell
John what you have seen and heard; that the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor have the good news preached to them; [7:23]and blessed is he who
shall not be offended with me.

4 [7:24]And when the messengers of John had gone away, he said to the
multitudes concerning John, What went you out into the wilderness to
see? A reed shaken with a wind? [7:25]But what went you out to see? A
man dressed in fine clothes? Behold, those who wear fine clothes, and
live in luxury, are in royal palaces.  [7:26]But what went you out to
see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet. [7:27]This is
he of whom it is written; Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
who shall prepare your way before you. [7:28]I tell you, that among
those born of women there is no greater prophet than John; but the
least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. [7:29]And all the
people who heard this, and the publicans, justified God, having
received the baptism of John. [7:30]But the Pharisees and lawyers
rejected the counsel of God as to themselves, not having been baptized
by him.

5 [7:31][And he said], To what then shall I compare the men of this
generation? and what are they like? [7:32]They are like little children
sitting in the market, and they call to each other, saying, We have
played on pipes to you, and you have not danced; we have mourned to
you, and you have not lamented. [7:33] For John the Baptist came
neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, He has a demon.
[7:34]The Son of man has come eating and drinking, and you say, Behold
a glutton and a wine drinker! a friend of publicans and sinners! [7:35]
And Wisdom is justified by all her children.




