CHAPTER X. CHRIST ANOINTED BY THE WOMAN, HIS TRAVELS AND ATTENDANTS, THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER.


1 [7:36]AND one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him; and going
into the Pharisee's house he reclined. [7:37]And behold, a certain
woman in the city, a sinner, knowing that he was reclining in the house
of the Pharisee, brought a vase of ointment, [7:38]and standing behind,
by his feet, weeping, washed his feet with tears, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head; and she kissed his feet, and anointed them with
the ointment.  [7:39]And the Pharisee who invited him, seeing it, spoke
within himself, saying, If this was a prophet he would have known who
and what kind of a woman this is who touches him; for she is a sinner.

2 [7:40]And Jesus answered and said to him, Simon, I have something to
say to you. And he said, Teacher, say it. [7:41]A certain creditor had
two debtors; one owed him five hundred denarii [$70], and the other
fifty [$7]. [7:42]And having nothing to pay, he gave [the debt] to
both. Tell me, therefore, which of them will love him most? [7:43]Simon
answered and said, I suppose the one to whom he gave most. And he said
to him, You have judged rightly. [7:44]And turning to the woman, he
said to Simon, Do you see this woman? I came into your house; you gave
me no water for my feet; but she has wet my feet with tears, and wiped
them with her hairs. [7:45]You gave me no kiss; but she, from the time
that I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. [7:46]You anointed not
my head with oil; but she has anointed my feet with ointment.
[7:47]Therefore, I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven;
for she has loved much; but he to whom little is forgiven, loves
little. [7:48]And he said to her, Your sins are forgiven. [7:49]And
those who reclined with him said within themselves, Who is this that
forgives sins also? [7:50]And he said to the woman, Your faith has
saved you; go in peace.

3 [8:1]And he travelled in order through the cities and villages,
proclaiming and preaching the good news of the kingdom of God; and the
twelve were with him, [8:2]and certain women who had been cured of evil
spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, from whom went out
seven demons, [8:3]and Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and
Susannah, and many others, who served them with their property.

4 [8:4]And a great multitude having come together, and persons having
come to him from every city, he said in a parable, [8:5]A sower went
out to sow his seed; and in his sowing, some fell by the way, and was
trodden down, and the birds of heaven devoured it; [8:6]and some fell
on the rock, and springing up it was dried up, because it had no
moisture; [8:7]and some fell in the midst of thorns, and the thorns
springing up choked it; [8:8]and some fell on good ground, and growing
up bore fruit a hundred fold.  Having said these things, he cried, He
that has ears to hear, let him hear.

5 [8:9]And his disciples asked him, What does this parable mean?
[8:10]And he said, It is given to you to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God, but to others in parables; that seeing they may not
see, and hearing they may not understand. [8:11]But the parable
signifies this; the seed is the word of God; [8:12]those by the way are
those who hear, then comes the devil and takes away the word from their
hearts, that they may not believe and be saved; [8:13]those on the rock
are those who, when they hear, receive the word with joy, and they have
no root; they believe for a time, and in a time of trial fall away;
[8:14] and that which fell among thorns signifies those who hear, and
going away are choked by cares and riches and the pleasures of this
life, and bring no fruit to perfection. [8:15]But that on the good
ground signifies those who, with a noble and good heart, hearing the
word retain it, and bear fruit persistently.

6 [8:16]But no one lights a candle and covers it with a vessel, or puts
it under a bed; but he puts it in a candlestick, that those coming in
may see the light. [8:17]For there is nothing hid which shall not be
manifest, nor concealed which shall not be known and come to light.
[8:18]See therefore how you hear; for whoever has, to him shall be
given, and whoever has not, from him shall be taken away even what he
seems to have.

7 [8:19]And his mother and brothers came to him, and were not able to
approach him on account of the multitude. [8:20]And it was told him by
some, saying, Your mother and your brothers stand without, wishing to
see you. [8:21]And he answered and said to them, My mother and my
brothers are those who hear the word of God and perform it.




