CHAPTER XI. CHRIST STILLING A TEMPEST, CURING A DEMONIAC, RAISING THE DAUGHTER OF JAIRUS.


1 [8:22]AND on one of those days both he and his disciples went into
the ship; and he said to them, Let us cross over to the other side of
the lake. And they set sail; [8:23]and as they were sailing he fell
asleep. And a tempest of wind came down on the lake, and they were
flooded with water, and in peril. [8:24] And they came and awoke him,
saying, Master! Master! we are perishing! And he arose, and rebuked the
wind and the waves, and they ceased, and there was a calm. [8:25]And he
said to them, Where is your faith? And they were afraid, and wondered,
saying one to another, What man then is this, that he commands the
winds and the water and they obey him?

2 [8:26]And they sailed to the country of the Gerasenes, which is
opposite to Galilee. [8:27]And as he went out on the land, there met
him a certain man from the city who had had demons for a long time; and
he wore no clothes, and remained not in a house, but in the tombs.
[8:28]And seeing Jesus, he cried out, and worshipped him, and said with
a loud voice, What have you to do with me, Jesus, son of the Most High
God? I beg of you not to torment me; [8:29]for he had commanded the
impure spirit to go out of the man; for it had often seized him; and he
had been bound with chains, and confined with fetters; and breaking his
bonds he had been driven by the demon into solitary places. [8:30]And
Jesus asked him, saying, What is your name? And he said, Legion;
because many demons had entered into him. [8:31]And he besought him not
to command them to go into the abyss. [8:32]And there was a herd of
many swine feeding on the mountain, and they besought him to permit
them to enter into them; and be permitted them.  [8:33]And the demons
going out of the man entered into the swine; and the herd rushed down
the precipice into the lake and were drowned.

3 [8:34]And those who fed them, seeing what was done, fled and reported
it in the city and in the country places. [8:35]And they went out to
see what had happened, and came to Jesus, and found the man from whom
the demons had gone out sitting, clothed and of a sound mind, at the
feet of Jesus; and they were afraid.  [8:36]And those who had seen
related to them how the demoniac had been cured. [8:37]And all the
multitude of the region about the Gerasenes requested him to depart
from them, because they were seized with great fear. And entering into
the ship, he returned.  [8:38]And the man from whom the demons had gone
out desired to be with him; but he sent him away, saying, [8:39]Return
to your house, and declare how great things God has done for you. And
he went away proclaiming in all the city what great things Jesus had
done for him.

4 [8:40]And when Jesus returned the multitude received him; for they
were all waiting for him. [8:41]And behold, a man by the name of Jairus
came; and he was the ruler of a synagogue. And falling at the feet of
Jesus, he besought him to come to his house, [8:42]for he had an only
daughter twelve years old, and she was dying. And when he was going,
the multitudes thronged him. [8:43]And a woman having a hemorrhage of
twelve years, who had spent all her living on physicians, and could not
be cured by any one, [8:44]coming up behind, touched the fringe of his
garment, and immediately her flow of blood was stopped. [8:45] And
Jesus said, Who touched me? And all denying, Peter and those with him
said, Master, the multitudes press upon and throng you, and do you say,
Who touched me? [8:46]And Jesus said, Some one touched me; for I
perceived a power going from me. [8:47]And the woman seeing that she
was not concealed, came trembling, and falling down related to him in
the presence of all the people for what cause she had touched him, and
how she was immediately cured. [8:48]And he said to her, Daughter, your
faith has cured you; go in peace.

5 [8:49]While he was yet speaking some one came from the synagogue
ruler's house and said to him, Your daughter has died; trouble not the
teacher. [8:50] But Jesus hearing it answered him, Fear not; only
believe, and she shall be cured. [8:51]And when he entered into the
house, he permitted no one to go in with him, except Peter, and John,
and James, and the father and mother of the child. [8:52]And all wept
and lamented her. But he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleeps.
[8:53]And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead. [8:54]And
taking her hand, he called, saying, Child, arise! [8:55]And her spirit
returned, and she arose immediately. And he commanded food to be given
her.  [8:56]And her parents were astonished; and he commanded them to
tell no one what was done.




