CHAPTER XII. CHRIST ENDOWING THE TWELVE APOSTLES WITH MIRACULOUS POWERS, THE PERPLEXITY OF HEROD, THE FEEDING OF THE FIVE THOUSAND, PETER'S CONFESSION, ETC.


1 [9:1]AND calling together the twelve, he gave them power and
authority over all demons, and to cure diseases, [9:2]and sent them out
to proclaim the kingdom of God, and to cure the sick.  [9:3]And he said
to them, Take for the way neither a staff nor a provision sack, nor
bread, nor silver, and have not two coats apiece. [9:4]And into
whatever house you enter, there remain and thence depart. [9:5]And
whoever does not receive you, when you go out of that city shake off
the dust from your feet for a testimony to them. [9:6]And they went out
and passed through the villages, everywhere proclaiming the good news
and performing cures.

2 [9:7]And Herod the tetrarch heard all things which were done, and was
perplexed, because it was said by some that John was raised from the
dead, [9:8] and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that
one of the old prophets had arisen. [9:9]And Herod said, John I
beheaded; but who is this, of whom I hear such things? And he sought to
see him.

3 [9:10]And the apostles returned and reported to him all things which
they had done. And taking them aside, he departed privately to the city
called Bethsaida. [9:11]And the multitudes knowing it followed him. And
having received them, he spoke to them of the kingdom of God, and cured
those having need of cure. [9:12] And the day began to decline; and the
twelve came and said to him, Dismiss the multitude, that they may go to
the villages and farms around, and lodge, and find provisions; for we
are here in a solitary place. [9:13]And he said to them, Give them
something to eat. And they said, We have not more than five loaves and
two fishes, unless we go and buy provisions for all this multitude;
[9:14]for they were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples, Make them recline in companies of fifty each; [9:15]and they
did so, and caused them all to recline. [9:16]And taking the five
loaves and two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and
broke, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude. [9:17]And
they eat and were all filled; and there was taken up what remained over
to them, twelve traveling-baskets of fragments.

4 [9:18]And when he was praying alone, the disciples came to him, and
he asked them, saying, Who do the multitudes say that I am?  [9:19]And
they answered and said, John the Baptist; and some Elijah, and others
that one of the old prophets has arisen.  [9:20]And he said to them,
Who do you say that I am? And Peter answered and said, The Christ of
God. [9:21]And he charged and commanded them to tell this to no one;
[9:22]saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected
by the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and be
raised on the third day.

5 [9:23]And he said to all, If any one wishes to come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.  [9:24]For whoever
wishes to save his life, shall lose it; and whoever shall lose his life
for my sake, shall save it. [9:25]For what is a man profited if he
gains the whole world and destroys himself, or loses his life?
[9:26]For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and that of the Father,
and of the holy angels. [9:27]And I tell you of a truth, there are some
of those standing here who shall not taste death till they see the
kingdom of God.




