CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST TRANSFIGURED, CURING A DEMONIAC, AND REPROVING AMBITION.


1 [9:28]AND about eight days after these words, taking Peter, and
James, and John, he went up on the mountain to pray. [9:29]And while he
was praying, the appearance of his face was changed, and his clothes
became white and shining; [9:30]and behold, two men conversed with him,
who were Moses and Elijah, [9:31] who appearing in glory spoke of his
departure which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. [9:32]And
Peter and those with him were oppressed with sleep; and when they awoke
they saw his glory, and the two men standing with him. [9:33] And when
they were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good
for us to be here; and let us make three tabernacles; one for you, and
one for Moses, and one for Elijah; not knowing what he said.  [9:34]And
when he had said this, a cloud came and overshadowed them; and they
were afraid when they entered into the cloud.  [9:35]And there was a
voice from the cloud, saying, This is my chosen Son; hear him.
[9:36]And when the voice had passed, Jesus was found alone. And they
were silent and told no man in those days any thing of what they had
seen.

2 [9:37]And on the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a
great multitude met him. [9:38]And behold, a man from the multitude
cried, saying, Teacher, I desire you to look upon my son, for he is my
only child; [9:39]and behold a spirit takes him, and suddenly cries out
and convulses him, with foam and crushing him departs from him with
difficulty; [9:40]and I desired your disciples to cast it out, and they
could not.  [9:41]And Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse
generation! How long shall I be with you, and suffer you! Bring your
son hither. [9:42]And while he was coming, the demon tore him with
spasms and convulsed him. And Jesus rebuked the impure spirit, and
cured the child, and gave him back to his father.  [9:43]And they were
all astonished at the majesty of God.

3 And while all wondered at all things which he did, he said to his
disciples, [9:44]Commit these words to your ears; for the Son of man is
about to be delivered into the hands of men. [9:45]But they understood
not this saying; and it was concealed from them, that they might not
perceive it; and they feared to ask him concerning this saying.

4 [9:46]And there arose a debate among them, which of them should be
the greatest. [9:47]And Jesus perceiving the debate in their minds,
took a little child and set it by him, [9:48]and said to them, Whoever
receives this little child in my name, receives me; and whoever
receives me, receives him that sent me. For he that is least among you
all, he shall be the greatest. [9:49]And John answered and said,
Master, we saw one casting out demons in your name, and we forbade him,
because he follows not with us.  [9:50]And Jesus said to him, Forbid
him not; for whoever is not against us is for us.




