CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST ON HIS LAST JOURNEY FROM GALILEE TO JERUSALEM.


1 [9:51]AND when the days were completed for his being taken up, he set
his face firmly to go to Jerusalem. [9:52]And he sent messengers before
him; and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to
prepare for him. [9:53]And they did not receive him, because he was
going to Jerusalem. [9:54] And his disciples James and John seeing it,
said, Lord, do you wish us to call fire to come down from heaven and
consume them? [9:55]And he turned around and rebuked them; and they
went to another village.

2 [9:57]And as they were traveling on the way, one said to him, I will
follow you wherever you go. [9:58]And Jesus said to him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of heaven places of shelter; but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head. [9:59]And he said to another, Follow me.
And he said, Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father. [9:60]But
he said to him, Let the dead bury their dead, but do you go and
proclaim abroad the kingdom of God.  [9:61]And another also said, Lord,
I will follow you, but permit me first to bid farewell to those in my
house. [9:62]But Jesus said, No man putting his hand on the plow, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

3 [10:1]And after these things the Lord designated seventy others also,
and sent them out, two by two, before his face, into every city and
place where he was about to come. [10:2]And he said to them, The
harvest indeed is great, but the laborers few; pray, therefore, the
Lord of the harvest to thrust out laborers into his harvest. [10:3]Go;
behold I send you as lambs in the midst of wolves. [10:4]Carry neither
a purse, nor provision sack, nor sandals; and salute no one by the way.
[10:5]And into whatever house you enter, first say, Peace to this
house! [10:6]And if a son of peace is there, your peace shall rest upon
him; but if not, it shall return to you. [10:7]And in the same house
remain, eating and drinking the things with them; for the laborer is
worthy of his reward. Go not about from house to house. [10:8]And into
whatever city you enter, and they receive you, eat what is set before
you; [10:9]and cure the sick in it, and say to them, The kingdom of God
has come nigh to you. [10:10] And into whatever city you enter, and
they receive you not, going out into its streets, say, [10:11]Even the
dust of your city which adheres to our feet we wipe off for you; but
know this, that the kingdom of God is at hand. [10:12]I tell you, it
shall be more tolerable for Sodom in that day than for that city.
[10:13]Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty
works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which have been done in you, they
would long ago have changed their minds, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes. [10:14]But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the
judgment, than for you. [10:15]And you, Capernaum, even to heaven will
you be exalted? even to hades shall you be cast down.  [10:16]He that
hears you, hears me; and he that rejects you, rejects me; and he that
rejects me, rejects him that sent me.

4 [10:17]And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the
demons are subject to us by your name. [10:18]And he said to them, I
saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven. [10:19]Behold, I give you
power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and on all the power of the
enemy; and nothing shall by any means injure you; [10:20]but in this
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your
names are written in heaven.

5 [10:21]In the same hour he rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to babes. Yes, Father, for
so it has seemed good in thy sight.  [10:22]And turning to his
disciples, he said, All things are delivered to me by my Father; and no
one knows who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is but the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. [10:23]And turning
around to his disciples he said privately, Blessed are the eyes which
see what you see! [10:24]For I tell you that many prophets and kings
have desired to see the things which you see, and have not seen them,
and to hear the things which you hear, and have not heard them.




