CHAPTER XV. THE WAY OF SALVATION, MARY'S CHOICE, AND LESSONS ON PRAYER.


1 [10:25]AND behold, a certain lawyer stood up to try him, saying,
Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?  [10:26]And he said
to him, What is written in the law? how do you read? [10:27]And he
answered and said, You shall love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all
your mind, and your neighbor as yourself. [10:28] And he said to him,
You have answered well; do this, and you shall live.

2 [10:29]But he, wishing to justify himself, said to Jesus, And who is
my neighbor? [10:30]And Jesus replied and said, A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who both stripped
him and inflicted blows upon him, and went away leaving him half dead.
[10:31]And, providentially, a certain priest went down that way, and
seeing him passed by on the other side. [10:32]And in like manner a
Levite also, being at the place, came and saw him, and passed by on the
other side.  [10:33]But a certain Samaritan, on a journey, came where
he was, and seeing him had compassion on him; [10:34]and he came and
bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine; and putting him on his
own beast, brought him to a khan, and took care of him.  [10:35]And on
the next day, putting out two denarii [28 cents], he gave them to the
khan-keeper, and said, Take care of him, and whatever you expend more,
when I return I will pay you.  [10:36]Which of these three think you
was a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers? [10:37]And he said,
He that had mercy on him. Then said Jesus to him, Do you go and do
likewise.

3 [10:38]And as they were pursuing their journey he entered into a
certain village. And a woman by the name of Martha received him into
her house. [10:39] And she had a sister called Mary, and she sat at the
feet of the Lord and heard his word. [10:40]But Martha was distracted
with much serving, and came and said, Lord, do you not care that my
sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her, therefore, to help me.
[10:41]And the Lord answered and said to her, Martha, Martha, you are
anxious and disturbed about many things, [10:42]but of one thing there
is need; and Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken
away from her.

4 [11:1]And as he was in a certain place praying, when he ceased one of
his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught
his disciples. [11:2]And he said to them, When you pray, say, Father,
hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; [11:3]give us daily our
essential bread; [11:4]and forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also
forgive every one who is indebted to us; and bring us not into trial.

5 [11:5]And he said to them, Which of you shall have a friend, and go
to him at midnight, and say, Friend, lend me three loaves, [11:6]for a
friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set
before him; [11:7]and he will answer from within, and say, Trouble me
not, for the door is already shut, and my little children are with me
in bed, I cannot arise and give you; [11:8]I tell you if he will not
arise and give him on account of being his friend, yet, on account of
his importunity, he will arise and give him as many as he needs.
[11:9]And I tell you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you; [11:10]for every one
that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks,
it shall be opened. [11:11] And what father is there of you, who, if
his son asks for bread, will give him a stone? or if he asks also for a
fish, will for a fish give him a serpent? [11:12]or if he asks also for
an egg, will give him a scorpion? [11:13]If you then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall the Father
from heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.




