CHAPTER VI. CHRIST'S MIRACLES, PREVIOUS TO THE APPOINTMENT OF HIS TWELVE APOSTLES.


1 [8:1]AND when he went down from the mountain great multitudes
followed him; [8:2]and behold, a leper came and worshipped him, saying,
Lord, if you will, you can cleanse me. [8:3]And stretching out his
hand, he touched him, saying, I will; be cleansed; and his leprosy was
immediately cleansed. [8:4]And Jesus said to him, See that you tell no
man, but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift which
Moses commanded for a testimony to them.

2 [8:5]And when he entered into Capernaum a centurion came to him,
beseeching him, [8:6]and saying; Lord, my servant lies sick in my house
with paralysis, exceedingly distressed. [8:7]He said to him, I will
come and cure him. [8:8] And the centurion answered and said, Lord, I
am not fit that you should come under my roof; but only say the word
and my servant will be cured.  [8:9]For I also am a man under
authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this man, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this,
and he does it.  [8:10]Jesus hearing wondered and said to those that
followed him, I tell you truly, I have not found so great a faith with
any one in Israel; [8:11]and I tell you that many shall come from the
East and from the West, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, [8:12]but the children of the kingdom
shall be cast into the darkness outside; there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. [8:13]And Jesus said to the centurion, Go; as you
have believed be it to you; and the servant was cured at that hour.

3 [8:14]And Jesus coming into the house of Peter, saw his wife's mother
lying and sick with a fever. [8:15]And he touched her hand, and the
fever left her; and she arose and waited on them.  [8:16]And when it
was evening they brought him many demoniacs, and he cast out the
spirits with a word, and cured all that were sick, [8:17]that the word
might be fulfilled spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying; He took our
infirmities and bore our diseases.

4 [8:18]And Jesus seeing great multitudes around him commanded them to
go away to the other side. [8:19]And a certain scribe came and said to
him, Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.  [8:20]And Jesus said
to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have places of
shelter, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.
[8:21]Another of the disciples said to him, Lord, permit me first to go
away and bury my father.  [8:22]But Jesus said to him, Follow me, and
let the dead bury their dead. [8:23]And he entered into a ship, and his
disciples followed him. [8:24]And behold there was a great tempest on
the lake, so that the ship was covered with the waves; but he was
asleep. [8:25] And they came and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us; we
perish. [8:26]And he said to them, Why are you afraid, men of little
faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the lake, and there was
a great calm. [8:27]And the men wondered, saying, What kind of a man is
this, that the winds and the lake obey him?

5 [8:28]And when he had come to the other side, into the country of the
Gadarenes, two demoniacs met him, coming out of the tombs, exceedingly
fierce, so that no man could pass that way. [8:29]And behold they
cried, saying, What have you to do with us, Son of God? Have you come
hither before the time to torment us?  [8:30]And there was far off from
them a herd of many swine feeding. [8:31]And, the demons besought him,
saying, If you cast us out, send us into the herd of swine. [8:32]And
he said to them, Go. And going out, they went away into the herd of
swine, and, behold, the whole herd rushed down a precipice into the
lake, and died in the waters; [8:33]and those who fed them fled, and
going away into the city reported all things, and the events relating
to the demoniacs. [8:34]And behold all the city came out to meet Jesus;
and when they saw him they besought him to depart from their bounds.

6 [9:1]And entering a ship, he crossed over, and came to his own city;
[9:2] and behold they brought him a paralytic, lying on a bed. And
Jesus seeing their faith said to the paralytic, Son, be of good
courage; your sins are forgiven. [9:3]And behold some of the scribes
said within themselves, This man blasphemes. [9:4]And Jesus observing
their thoughts, said, Why do you think evil in your hearts? [9:5]For in
what respect is it easier to say, Your sins are forgiven, than to say,
Arise and walk? [9:6]But that you may know that the Son of man has
power on the earth to forgive sins, then he said to the paralytic,
Arise, take up your bed, and go to your house. [9:7]And he arose and
departed to his house.  [9:8]And when the multitudes saw it they were
afraid, and glorified God who had given such power to men.

7 [9:9]And Jesus departing thence saw a man sitting at the
custom-house, called Matthew; and he said to him, Follow me. And he
arose and followed him. [9:10] And he was reclining in the house, and
behold, many publicans and sinners came and reclined with Jesus and his
disciples. [9:11]And when the Pharisees saw them they said to his
disciples, Why does your teacher eat with publicans and sinners?
[9:12]And hearing it he said, The well need not a physician, but the
sick. [9:13]Go and learn what this means: I wish for mercy and not a
sacrifice; for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.

8 [9:14]Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and
the Pharisees fast much, but your disciples fast not?  [9:15]And Jesus
said to them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn as long as the
bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom
will be taken from them, and then they shalt fast. [9:16]But no one
puts a piece of unfilled cloth on an old garment; for it takes away its
fullness from the garment, and the rent is made worse. [9:17]Neither do
they put new wine into old bottles; otherwise the bottles break, and
the wine is poured out and the bottles destroyed; but they put new wine
into new bottles, and both are preserved.

9 [9:18]While he was saying these words to them, behold a ruler came
and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is now dead, but come and put
your hand on her and she shall live. [9:19]And Jesus arose and followed
him, and his disciples. [9:20]And behold a woman having a hemorrhage of
twelve years approached him from behind, and touched the fringe of his
garment; [9:21]for she said within herself, If I can only touch his
garment I shall be cured.  [9:22]And Jesus turning around and seeing
her, said, Daughter, be of good courage, your faith has cured you. And
the woman was cured from that hour.

10 [9:23]And Jesus coming into the house of the ruler, and seeing the
musicians and the multitude making a tumultuous noise, [9:24]said, Go
away; for the girl is not dead, but asleep. And they derided him.
[9:25]But when the multitude were removed he went in and took her hand,
and the girl arose. [9:26]And the report went out into all that land.

11 [9:27]And as Jesus was departing thence two blind men followed him,
crying and saying, Have mercy on us, Son of David! [9:28]And when he
had gone into the house the blind men came to him, and Jesus said to
them, Do you believe that I am able to do this?  They said to him, Yes,
Lord. [9:29]Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith
be it to you; [9:30]and their eyes were opened. And Jesus charged them
strictly, saying, See that no one knows it. [9:31]But they went out and
made him known in all that land.

12 [9:32]And when they had gone away, behold, the people brought to him
a man, a dumb demoniac. [9:33]And the demon being cast out, the dumb
spoke; and the multitudes wondered, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel. [9:34]But the Pharisees said, He casts out demons by the ruler
of the demons.

13 [9:35]And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and
curing every disease, and every infirmity. [9:36]And seeing the
multitudes he had compassion on them because they were faint and
scattered, like sheep without a shepherd. [9:37]Then he said to his
disciples, The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers few.
[9:38]Pray, therefore, the Lord of the harvest to thrust laborers into
his harvest.




