CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST DEFENDS THE DIVINE CHARACTER OF HIS MIRACLES, AND DENOUNCES THE PHARISEES.


1 [11:14]AND he cast out a demon, and it was dumb. And when the demon
had gone out, the dumb spoke; and the multitudes wondered.  [11:15]But
some of them said, He casts out demons by Beelzebul, the ruler of
demons; [11:16]and others, trying him, asked of him a sign from heaven.
[11:17]But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom
divided against itself is desolated, and house falls upon house.
[11:18]And if Satan is divided against himself, how shall his kingdom
stand? because you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul. [11:19]But
if I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by whom do your sons cast them out?
they, therefore, shall be your judges. [11:20]But if by a finger of God
I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
[11:21]When a strong man armed keeps his court, his goods are in peace;
[11:22]but when a stronger man than he comes upon him, and overcomes
him, he takes away all his arms in which he trusted, and distributes
his spoils. [11:23]He that is not with me is against me; and he that
gathers not with me scatters.

2 [11:24]When an impure spirit has gone out of a man, it passes through
places destitute of water, seeking a rest; and not finding one, says, I
will return to my house from which I came out. [11:25]And coming, it
finds it swept and adorned.  [11:26]Then it goes and takes seven other
spirits more evil than itself; and they come and dwell there; and the
last condition of that man is worse than the first.

3 [11:27]And when he was saying these things, a certain woman from the
multitude lifted up her voice, and said to him, Blessed is the mother
that bore you, and the breasts which you nursed!  [11:28]And he said,
Yes indeed, blessed are those that hear the word of God and keep it.

4 [11:29]And multitudes being assembled, he said, This generation is an
evil generation. It seeks for a sign, and no sign shall be given it but
the sign of Jonah. [11:30]For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so
also shall the Son of man be to this generation. [11:31]The queen of
the south shall rise in the judgment with the men of this generation
and condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
[11:32]The men of Nineveh shall arise in the judgment with this
generation and condemn it; for they changed their minds at the
preaching of Jonah, and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.

5 [11:33]No one lights a candle and puts it in a secret place, or under
a modius [1.916 gallon measure], but on a candlestick, that all who go
in may see the light. [11:34]The light of the body is the eye; when,
therefore, your eye is sound, your whole body is light; but when your
eye is evil, your whole body is dark.  [11:35]See, therefore, that the
light which is in you be not darkness. [11:36]If, therefore, your whole
body is light, not having any part dark, the whole will be light, as
when a candle lights you clearly.

6 [11:37]And when he was speaking, a certain Pharisee asked him to
breakfast with him; and he went in and immediately sat down.
[11:38]And the Pharisee seeing him, wondered that he was not first
baptized before breakfast. [11:39] And the Lord said to him, Now you
Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and plate, but your inside is
full of plunder and wickedness.  [11:40]Senseless men! did not he that
made the outside make also the inside? [11:41]But give the things
within in charity, and behold, all things are pure to you.

7 [11:42]But woe to you, Pharisees! for you tithe mint, and rue, and
every kind of plant, and omit justice and the love of God.  These
things you ought to do, and not to omit those. [11:43]Woe to you,
Pharisees! for you love the first seat in the synagogues, and
salutations in the markets. [11:44]Woe to you! for you are like
concealed tombs; and men walk over them and know it not.

8 [11:45]And one of the lawyers answered and said to him, Teacher, in
saying these things you reproach us also. [11:46]And he said, Woe to
you, lawyers! for you load men with burdens difficult to be borne, and
you yourselves will not touch the burdens with one of your fingers.
[11:47]Woe to you! for you build the tombs of the prophets, and your
fathers killed them; [11:48]therefore you are witnesses, and approve
the deed of your fathers; for they killed them, and you build.
[11:49]Therefore also the wisdom of God said, I will send them prophets
and apostles, and some of them they shall kill and persecute, [11:50]
that the blood of all the prophets which has been poured out since the
foundation of the world may be required of this generation, [11:51]from
the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the
altar and the house. Yes, I tell you, it shall be required of this
generation. [11:52]Woe to you, lawyers! for you have taken away the key
of knowledge; you do not enter in yourselves, and you forbid those
entering.

9 [11:53]And when he had gone out thence the scribes and Pharisees were
extremely angry, and questioned him on many subjects, [11:54]watching
him, to catch something from his mouth.




