CHAPTER XVIII. CHRIST COMMENTING ON THE SLAUGHTER OF CERTAIN GALILEANS, CURING A DEMONIAC ON THE SABBATH, THE SAVED, ETC.


1 [13:1]AND some were present at that time, telling him of the
Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices.  [13:2]And
he answered and said to them, Do you think those Galileans were sinners
above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? [13:3]I
tell you, No; but unless you change your minds you shall all in like
manner be destroyed. [13:4]Or those eighteen on whom the tower in the
Siloam fell, and killed them; do you think they were sinners above all
men that live at Jerusalem? [13:5]I tell you, No; but unless you change
your minds you shall all in like manner be destroyed.

2 [13:6]And he spoke this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.
[13:7]And he said to his vine dresser, Behold, I have come three years
seeking fruit on this fig tree and find none; cut it down; why should
it make the ground unproductive? [13:8] And he answered and said to
him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I dig about it, and put on
manure; [13:9]and if it bears fruit, well; but if not, at a future time
you shall cut it down.

3 [13:10]And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath,
[13:11] and behold, there was a woman who had been subject to a spirit
of infirmity eighteen years, and was bent down, and was not able to
lift herself up at all. [13:12]And Jesus seeing her, called to her and
said, Woman, you are released from your infirmity; [13:13]and he put
his hands on her, and immediately she was made straight, and glorified
God. [13:14]And the synagogue ruler answered, being angry because Jesus
had performed a cure on the sabbath, and said to the multitude, There
are six days in which you ought to work; in them, therefore, come and
be cured, and not on the sabbath. [13:15]Then the Lord answered him and
said, Hypocrites, does not each of you on the sabbath untie his ox or
his ass from the manger, and lead him away to drink? [13:16]And ought
not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound,
behold, eighteen years, to be released from this bond on the sabbath?
[13:17]And when he had said these things all his enemies were ashamed;
and all the people rejoiced on account of all the glorious works
performed by him.

4 [13:18]And he said, What is the kingdom of God like? and to what
shall I liken it? [13:19]It is like a mustard seed which a man took and
cast into his garden; and it grew and became a great tree, and the
birds of heaven lodged in its branches.  [13:20]Again he said, To what
shall I liken the kingdom of God?  [13:21]It is like leaven which a
woman took and hid in three sata [33 quarts] of flour, till the whole
was leavened.

5 [13:22]And he went through the cities and villages teaching, and
making his way towards Jerusalem. [13:23]And some one said to him,
Lord, are there few who are saved? And he said to them, [13:24]Strive
to enter in by the narrow gate; for many, I tell you, shall seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. [13:25] When the householder has risen
and shut the door, and you stand without and knock at the door, saying,
Lord, open to us, and he will answer and say to you, I know you not
whence you are, [13:26]then you will say, We eat and drank in your
presence, and you have taught in our streets; [13:27]and he will say to
you, I know not whence you are; depart from me, all doers of
wickedness.  [13:28] There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when
you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in
the kingdom of God, and you cast out. [13:29]And they shall come from
the east and west, and from the north and south, and shall recline in
the kingdom of God. [13:30]And behold, there are last who shall be
first, and there are first who shall be last.

6 [13:31]On the same day some of the Pharisees came to him, saying, Go
out and depart hence, for Herod wishes to kill you.  [13:32]And he said
to them, Go and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out demons, and finish
[performing] cures to-day and to-morrow, and on the third day I shall
finish my course. [13:33]But I must go on to-day and to-morrow, and the
day following; for it is not possible for a prophet to be destroyed out
of Jerusalem.  [13:34]Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets and
stoning those sent to her, how often would I have gathered your
children together, as a bird gathers her young under her wings, and you
would not! [13:35]Behold, your house is left to you. And I tell you,
that you shall not see me, till [the day] shall come when you shall
say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.




