CHAPTER XX. PARABLES OF THE LOST SHEEP, THE LOST MONEY, AND THE PRODIGAL SON.


1 [15:1]AND all the publicans and sinners came near him to hear him.
[15:2]And both the Pharisees and scribes complained, saying, This man
receives sinners and eats with them. [15:3]And he spoke to them this
parable; saying, [15:4]What man of you having a hundred sheep, and
losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness,
and go after the lost sheep till he finds it. [15:5]And finding it, he
puts it on his shoulders rejoicing; [15:6]and coming to the house, he
calls together his friends and neighbors, saying, Congratulate me; for
I have found my sheep that was lost. [15:7]So, I tell you, there shall
be joy in heaven over one sinner that changes his mind, more than over
ninety-nine righteous persons who do not need a change of mind.

2 [15:8]Or what woman having ten drachmas [140 cents], if she loses one
drachma [14 cents], does not light a candle, and sweep the house, and
seek carefully till she finds it? [15:9]And when she finds it, she
calls her female friends and neighbors together, saying, Congratulate
me, for I have found the drachma which I lost. [15:10]So, I tell you,
there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner that changes his
mind.

3 [15:11]And he said, A certain man had two sons. [15:12]And the
youngest of them said to the father, Father, give me the portion of the
estate that falls to me; and he divided to them his living. [15:13]And
not many days after, the youngest son, collecting all his property,
went abroad to a distant country; and there wasted his property, living
intemperately. [15:14]And when he had spent all, there was a severe
famine in that country; and he began to be in want. [15:15]And he went
and attached himself to one of the citizens of that country; and he
sent him into his field to feed swine. [15:16]And he desired to fill
his stomach with the carob pods which the swine eat; and no man gave
him.

4 [15:17]And coming to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my
father abound in bread, but I perish here with hunger!  [15:18]I will
arise and go to my father, and say to him, Father, I have sinned to
Heaven, and before you; [15:19]I am no longer worthy to be called your
son; make me as one of your hired servants. [15:20]And he arose, and
came to his father. But while he was yet far off, his father saw him,
and had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed
him. [15:21]And the son said to him, Father, I have sinned to Heaven,
and before you; I am no longer worthy to be called your son. [15:22]
But the father said to his servants, Bring out the best robe and put on
him; and put a ring on his hand, and sandals on his feet; [15:23]and
bring the fatted calf and kill it; let us eat, and rejoice; [15:24]for
this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.
And they began to rejoice.

5 [15:25]But his older son was in the field; and when he came and
approached the house he heard music and the dancers. [15:26]And calling
one of the servants he inquired what these things meant.  [15:27]And he
said to him, Your brother has come; and your father has killed the
fatted calf, because he has received him back in health. [15:28]And he
was angry, and would not go in; but his father came out and entreated
him. [15:29]And he answered and said to his father, Behold, I have
served you so many years, and have never disobeyed your command; and
you have never given me a kid, that I might rejoice with my friends;
[15:30]but when this your son came who has consumed his living with
harlots, you killed for him the fatted calf. [15:31]But he said to him,
Son, you are always with me, and all mine is yours. [15:32]We ought
also to rejoice and be glad; for this your brother was dead, and is
alive again; and was lost, and is found.




