CHAPTER XXI. THE UNFAITHFUL STEWARD, AND THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS.


1 [16:1]AND he also said to the disciples, There was a certain rich man
that had a steward; and he was accused to him of wasting his property.
[16:2]And calling him, he said to him, What is this which I hear of
you? Render an account of your stewardship; for you can be no longer a
steward. [16:3]And the steward said within himself, What shall I do,
because my lord takes the stewardship away from me? I am not strong
enough to dig; I am ashamed to beg.  [16:4]I know what I will do, that
when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their
houses. [16:5]And calling each one of his lord's debtors, he said to
the first, How much do you owe my lord? [16:6]And he said, A hundred
baths [1,350 gallons] of oil. And he said to him, Take your bill, and
sit down quickly, and write fifty. [16:7]Then he said to another, And
how much do you owe? And he said, A hundred cors [1,445 bushels] of
wheat. And he said to him, Take your bill, and write eighty. [16:8]And
the lord praised the unjust steward, because he did wisely; for the
children of this life are wiser, for their generation, than the
children of light.

2 [16:9]And I tell you, Make yourselves friends of the riches procured
by injustice, that when it fails they may receive you into the eternal
tabernacles. [16:10]He that is faithful in the least is faithful also
in much; and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.
[16:11]If, therefore, you have not been faithful in the riches procured
by injustice, who will commit to you the true? [16:12]And if you have
not been faithful in another's, who will give you yours? [16:13]No
domestic can serve two masters; for he will either hate the first and
love the other, or he will adhere to the first and despise the other.
You cannot serve God and riches.

3 [16:14]And the Pharisees, who are avaricious, heard all these things,
and derided him. [16:15]And he said to them, You are they that justify
yourselves before men; but God knows your hearts; for that which is
high among men is an abomination before God.  [16:16]The law and the
prophets were till John; since that time the kingdom of God is
preached, and every one presses violently into it. [16:17]And it is
easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one point of the law
to fail. [16:18]Every one that puts away his wife and marries another,
commits adultery; and he that marries a woman put away from a husband,
commits adultery.

4 [16:19]There was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and
fine linen, and feasted sumptuously every day.  [16:20]And a certain
poor man by the name of Lazarus was laid at his gate, afflicted with
ulcers, [16:21]and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from
the rich man's table; but the dogs also came and licked his ulcers.
[16:22]And the poor man died, and was carried away by the angels to
Abraham's bosom. And the rich man also died, and was buried; [16:23]and
in hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and saw Abraham from
afar, and Lazarus in his bosom. [16:24]And he called and said, Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his
finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am in pain in this flame.

5 [16:25]But Abraham said, Son, remember that you received your good
things in your life, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he
is comforted here, and you are in pain. [16:26]And besides all this,
there is a great chasm fixed between us and you, so that those wishing
to pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass from thence to
us. [16:27]And he said, I beseech you then, father, send him to my
father's house, [16:28]for I have five brothers, to testify fully to
them, that they may not also come to this place of torment [16:29]But
Abraham said, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.
[16:30]But he said, No, father Abraham, but if one went to them from
the dead they would change their minds. [16:31]But he said to him, If
they hear not Moses and the prophets, they would not be persuaded if
one arose from the dead.




