CHAPTER XXII. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE RESPECTING OFFENSES, CURING TEN LEPERS, AND PREDICTING THE COMING OF HIS KINGDOM.


1 [17:1]AND he said to his disciples, It is inevitable that offenses
should come; but woe to him by whom they come; [17:2]it would be
profitable for him if a millstone was placed around his neck, and he
was cast into the sea, rather than that he should offend one of these
little ones. [17:3]Take heed to yourselves; if your brother sins,
reprove him; and if he changes his mind, forgive him; [17:4]and if he
sins against you seven times in a day, and turn seven times, saying, I
change my mind, you shall forgive him.

2 [17:5]And the apostles said to the Lord, Increase our faith.
[17:6]And the Lord said, If you had a faith like a mustard seed, you
would say to this sycamore tree, Be taken up by the roots and planted
in the sea, and it would obey you. [17:7]But which of you having a
servant plowing, or keeping sheep, will say to him when he comes in
from the field, Come immediately and sit down?  [17:8]but will he not
say to him, Prepare something that I may take supper, and gird yourself
and wait on me till I eat and drink, and after that do you eat and
drink? [17:9]Does he thank the servant because he did the things
commanded him? [17:10]So also you, when you have done all things
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants; what we owed the
doing of; we have done.

3 [17:11]And he was going to Jerusalem, and he passed through the midst
of Samaria and Galilee. [17:12]And coming to a certain village, ten
lepers met him, who stood afar off. [17:13]And they lifted up their
voice saying, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.  [17:14]And seeing them,
he said, Go and show yourselves to the priests. And as they were going
they were cleansed. [17:15] And one of them seeing that he was cured,
returned, glorifying God with a loud voice, [17:16]and fell on his face
at his feet and thanked him. And he was a Samaritan. [17:17]And Jesus
answered and said to him, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are
the nine? [17:18]There are not found returning to give glory to God any
but this stranger. [17:19]And he said to him, Arise and go; your faith
has cured you.

4 [17:20]And being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God
comes, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God comes not with
observation; [17:21] neither shall they say, Behold here!  or, there!
for behold, the kingdom of God is within you.  [17:22]And he said to
the disciples, The days will come when you shall desire to see one of
the days of the Son of man, and shall not see it. [17:23]And they shall
say to you, Behold there!  behold here! go not away, nor follow them.
[17:24]For as the lightning flashing from one part under heaven shines
to another part under heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his day.
[17:25]But first he must suffer many things, and be rejected by this
generation. [17:26]And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be
also in the days of the Son of man. [17:27]They eat, they drank, they
married, they were married, till the day that Noah entered into the
ark, and the flood came and destroyed all.  [17:28]In like manner also
as it was in the days of Lot; they eat, drank, bought, sold, planted,
built; [17:29]but on the day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire
and sulphur from heaven, and destroyed all; [17:30]so shall it be in
the day when the Son of man is revealed.

5 [17:31]In that day let not him that shall be on the house, and his
furniture in the house, come down to take it away; and in like manner
let not him in the field turn back for things which are behind;
[17:32]remember Lot's wife. [17:33]Whoever shall seek to save his life
shall lose it; and whoever shall lose shall save it. [17:34]I tell you,
on that night two shall be on one bed; one shall be taken and the other
left; [17:35]two shall be grinding together; one shall be taken and the
other left. [17:37]And they answered and said to him, Where, Lord? And
he said to them, Where the body is, there will the eagles be gathered
together.




