CHAPTER XXIII. THE PARABLE OF THE UNJUST JUDGE, INFANTS, AND THE WAY OF SALVATION.


1 [18:1]AND he spoke also a parable to them, that men ought to pray at
all times, and not to faint; [18:2]saying, There was a certain judge in
a certain city, who feared not God and regarded not man. [18:3]And
there was a widow in that city, and she came to him, saying, Give me
judgment against my adversary. [18:4]And he would not for a time; but
afterwards he said within himself, Though I fear not God and regard not
man, [18:5]yet because this widow makes me trouble I will give her
judgment, that she may not vex me by her continual coming. [18:6]And
the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge says. [18:7]And will not God
execute the judgment of his elect, who cry day and night to him, even
though he waits long on them? [18:8]I tell you, he will execute their
judgment speedily. But when the Son of man comes will he find faith on
the earth?

2 [18:9]And he also spoke this parable to some who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and despised others: [18:10]Two
men went up to the temple to pray; one a Pharisee, and the other a
publican. [18:11]The Pharisee, standing by himself, offered this
prayer; God, I thank thee that I am not as other men, rapacious,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican; [18:12]I fast twice a
week; I tithe all I acquire. [18:13]And the publican, standing afar
off, would not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote on his breast,
saying, God, be propitious to me a sinner. [18:14]I tell you this man
went down to his house justified rather than that; for every one that
exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

3 [18:15]And they brought him also infants, that he should touch them;
and the disciples seeing it reproved them. [18:16]But Jesus calling
them, said, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them
not; for of such is the kingdom of God. [18:17]I tell you truly, that
whoever receives not the kingdom of God as a little child, shall by no
means enter into it.

4 [18:18]And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good teacher, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life? [18:19]And Jesus said to him, Why
do you call me good? There is none good but one, God.  [18:20]You know
the commandments; You shall not commit adultery, You shall not kill,
You shall not steal, You shall not testify falsely, Honor your father
and your mother. [18:21]And he said, All these have I kept from my
youth. [18:22]And Jesus hearing it, said to him, One thing you yet
want; sell all that you have, and distribute to the poor, and you shall
have a treasure in heaven, and come, follow me. [18:23]And when he
heard these things he was sad; for he was very rich. [18:24]And Jesus
seeing him, said, With what difficulty do those who have riches enter
into the kingdom of God! [18:25]It is easier for a camel to enter
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. [18:26]And those hearing him, said, And who can be
saved? [18:27]And he said, Things impossible with man are possible with
God.

5 [18:28]And Peter said, Behold, we have left our [property] and
followed you. [18:29]And he said to them, I tell you truly, that there
is no one who has left a house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or
children, on account of the kingdom of God, [18:30]who shall not
receive manifold more in this time, and in the life to come eternal
life.




