CHAPTER XXIV. CHRIST PREDICTING HIS DEATH, GIVING SIGHT TO A BLIND MAN, STOPPING WITH ZACCHEUS, AND THE PARABLE OF THE NOBLEMAN RECEIVING A KINGDOM.


1 [18:31]AND Jesus took the twelve aside, and said to them, Behold, we
go up to Jerusalem; and all things written by the prophets concerning
the Son of man will be finished. [18:32]For he will be delivered to the
Gentiles, and be mocked, and injuriously treated, and spit upon,
[18:33]and they will scourge and kill him, and on the third day he will
rise again. [18:34]And they understood nothing of these things; and
this word was concealed from them, and they did not perceive what was
said.

2 [18:35]And when they came nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man sat by
the way, begging. [18:36]And hearing the multitude passing by he
inquired what it meant. [18:37]And they told him, Jesus the Nazoraean
is passing by. [18:38]And he cried, saying, Jesus, Son of David, have
mercy on me. [18:39]And those going before charged him to be still; but
he cried much more, Son of David, have mercy on me. [18:40]And Jesus
stopping, commanded him to be brought to him. And when he came near he
asked him, [18:41]saying, What do you wish me to do for you? And he
said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. [18:42]And Jesus said to him,
Receive your sight; your faith has cured you. [18:43]And he immediately
received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God; and all the
people seeing it gave praise to God.

3 [19:1]And entering into Jericho he passed through it. [19:2]And
behold, there was a man called Zaccheus, and he was chief publican, and
was rich. [19:3] And he sought to see Jesus, who he was; and could not
on account of the multitude, because he was of small stature. [19:4]And
running before, he went up on a sycamore that he might see him; for he
was to pass by it. [19:5]And when he came to the place, Jesus looking
up saw him, and said to him, Zaccheus, make haste and come down, for
to-day I must stop at your house; [19:6]and he made haste and came
down, and received him rejoicing. [19:7]And seeing it, they all
complained, saying, He has gone in to stop with a sinner.

4 [19:8]And Zaccheus stood up and said to the Lord, Behold, half of my
property, Lord, I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded any one of
any thing, I restore fourfold. [19:9]And Jesus said to him, To-day has
salvation come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham;
[19:10]for the Son of man has come to seek and save the lost.

5 [19:11]And when they were hearing these things, he added and spoke a
parable, because he was nigh Jerusalem; and they thought that the
kingdom of God was immediately to appear. [19:12]He said, therefore, A
certain nobleman went into a distant country to receive a kingdom for
himself, and to return. [19:13]And calling his ten servants, he gave
them ten minas [$163.30], and said to them, Use them in business till I
come. [19:14]And his citizens hated him, and sent an embassy after him,
saying, We wish not this man to reign over us. [19:15]And he returned,
having received the kingdom, and ordered those servants to be called to
him to whom he had given the money, that he might know what each one
had done.

6 [19:16]And the first came, saying, Lord, your mina [$16.33] has
gained ten minas. [19:17]And he said to him, Well, good servant;
because you have been faithful in the least, have authority over ten
cities. [19:18]And the second came, saying, Lord, your mina has made
five minas. [19:19]And he said to him, Be you over five cities.
[19:20]And the other came, saying, Lord, behold your mina, which I had
laid up in a napkin; [19:21]for I feared you, because you are an
austere man; you take up what you laid not down, and reap what you did
not sow. [19:22]He said to him, Out of your mouth will I judge you,
evil servant. You knew that I am an austere man, taking up what I laid
not down, and reaping what I did not sow? [19:23]then why did you not
put my silver on the [broker's] table, and when I came I should have
had the same, with interest? [19:24]And he said to those standing by,
Take from him the mina, and give it to him that has ten minas,--
[19:25]and they said to him, Lord, he has ten minas,-- [19:26]for I
tell you, that to every one that has shall be given; but from him that
has not, even what he has shall be taken away; [19:27]but those my
enemies that wished me not to reign over them, bring hither and kill
them before me.




