CHAPTER XXV. CHRIST ENTERING JERUSALEM, AND PURIFYING THE TEMPLE.


1 [19:28]AND having said these things he went forward going up to
Jerusalem. [19:29]And when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany, at
the mountain called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
[19:30]saying, Go into the village opposite to you, and having entered
into it you will find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat; untie and
bring him; [19:31]and if any one asks you, Why do you untie him? Say
thus to him; The Lord has need of him. [19:32]And those sent, going,
found as he said to them.  [19:33]And untying the colt, his owners said
to them, Why do you untie the colt? [19:34]And they said, The Lord has
need of him.  [19:35]And they brought him to Jesus; and spreading their
clothes on the colt they put Jesus on him. [19:36]And as he proceeded
they spread their clothes in the way. [19:37]And when he was now
approaching, at the descent of the Mount of Olives, all the multitude
of the disciples began to rejoice, and praise God with a loud voice for
all the mighty works which they saw, [19:38]saying, Blessed is the king
who comes in the name of the Lord; peace be in heaven, and glory in the
highest [heavens].  [19:39]And some of the Pharisees, from the
multitude, said to him, Teacher, rebuke your disciples. [19:40]And he
answered and said to them, I tell you that if these should be silent
the stones would cry out.

2 [19:41]And when he came near and saw the city he wept over it,
[19:42] saying, O, that you had known, even you, and indeed in this
your day, the things which are for your peace! But now they are hid
from your eyes. [19:43]For days of [trouble] will come upon you, and
your enemies shall throw an embankment around you, and shut you in, and
press you on every side, [19:44]and destroy you and your children with
you, and not leave stone upon stone in you; because you knew not the
time of your visitation.

3 [19:45]And going into the temple he cast out those that sold,
[19:46]saying to them, it is written, My house shall be a house of
prayer; but you have made it a den of robbers.




