CHAPTER VII. THE APPOINTMENT OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES.


1 [10:1]AND calling his twelve disciples, he gave them power over
impure spirits to cast them out, and to cure every disease and every
infirmity. [10:2] And the names of the twelve apostles are these;
First, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James, the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother; [10:3]Philip and Bartholomew;
Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James, the son of Alpheus, and
Lebbeus, called Thaddeus; [10:4]Simon, the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him. [10:5]These twelve Jesus sent out and charged
them, saying; Go not into a way of gentiles, and enter not into a city
of Samaritans, [10:6]but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; [10:7]and as you go, preach, saying, The kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. [10:8] Cure the sick, cleanse lepers, cast out demons; you
have received gratuitously, gratuitously give. [10:9]Take not gold, nor
silver, nor copper for your purses, [10:10]nor a provision sack for the
way, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor staves; for the laborer is worthy of
his support; [10:11]and into whatever city or village you enter,
inquire who in it is worthy, and there remain till you leave.
[10:12]And when you go into a house, salute it; [10:13]and if the house
is worthy, your blessing shall come upon it; but if the house is not
worthy, your blessing shall return to you.  [10:14]And if any one does
not receive you, nor hear your words, when you go out of that house or
that city, shake off the dust of your feet. [10:15]I tell you truly, it
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in a day of
judgment, than for that city.

2 [10:16]Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be
therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.  [10:17]But beware of
men; for they will deliver you to Sanhedrims, and scourge you in their
synagogues, [10:18]and you shall be brought before governors, and
kings, for my sake, for a testimony to them and the nations. [10:19]But
when they have delivered you up be not anxious how you shall speak, or
what you shall say, for it shall be given you in that hour what to say;
[10:20]for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaks in you. [10:21]And a brother shall deliver a brother to death,
and a father a son; and children shall rise up against their parents
and put them to death; [10:22]and you shall be hated by all men for my
sake. But he that endures to the end shall be saved. [10:23]And when
they persecute you in one city, flee to another. For I tell you truly,
that you will not finish the cities of Israel till the Son of man shall
come.

3 [10:24]A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his
master. [10:25]It is sufficient for the disciple to be as his teacher,
and the servant as his master. If they have called the master of the
house Beelzebul, how much more will they call the members of his family
by that name. [10:26]Fear them not, therefore, for there is nothing
concealed that shall not be revealed, nor hid that shall not be known.
[10:27]What I tell you in darkness, speak in the light, and what you
hear in the ear, preach on the house-tops. [10:28]And fear not those
who kill the body and are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear
him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

4 [10:29]Are not two sparrows sold for an assarion [1.5 mills]?  and
one of them cannot fall to the ground without your Father.  [10:30]Even
the hairs of your head are all numbered. [10:31]Fear not, therefore,
you are of more value than many sparrows.  [10:32]Every one, therefore,
who shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my
Father in heaven; [10:33]and whoever denies me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father in heaven.

5 [10:34]Think not that I have come to send peace on the earth. I have
not come to send peace, but a sword. [10:35]I have come to set a man at
variance against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a
bride against her mother-in-law; [10:36]and a man's enemies shall be
those of his own house. [10:37]He that loves father or mother more than
me is not worthy of me; and he that loves son or daughter more than me
is not worthy of me; [10:38]and he that does not take up his cross and
follow me is not worthy of me. [10:39]He that finds his life shall lose
it, and he that loses his life for my sake shall find it. [10:40]He
that receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives him
that sent me. [10:41]He that receives a prophet in the name of a
prophet shall receive a prophet's reward, and he that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous
man's reward. [10:42]And whoever shall give one of these little ones a
cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, I tell you truly, he
shall by no means lose his reward. [11:1]And when Jesus had finished
his charge to his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and
preach in their cities.




