CHAPTER XXVII. CHRIST PREDICTING THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM AND HIS OWN EXALTATION.


1 [21:5]AND some speaking of the temple, that it was adorned with
beautiful stones and votive offerings, he said, [21:6]As to these
things which you see, the days will come in which stone shall not be
left upon stone that shall not be thrown down. [21:7]And they asked
him, saying, Teacher, when then shall these things be? and what sign
[shall there be], when these things are about to occur?  [21:8]And he
said, See that you be not deceived; for many shall come in my name,
saying, I am [Christ], and the time is at hand; go not after them.
[21:9] And when you hear of wars and insurrections, be not terrified,
for these things must be first; but the end is not immediately.

2 [21:10]Then said he to them, Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; [21:11]and in places there shall be great
earthquakes, and famines, and pestilences; and there shall also be
fearful sights and great signs from heaven. [21:12]But before all these
things they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, committing
you to synagogues and prisons, to be brought before kings and governors
on my account; [21:13]and it shall result to you for a testimony.
[21:14]Settle it in your minds, therefore, not to premeditate what
defense you shall make, [21:15]for I will give you a mouth and wisdom
which all your enemies shall not be able to resist or dispute.
[21:16]And you shall be delivered up by parents, and brothers, and
relatives, and friends; and they shall kill some of you; [21:17]and you
shall be hated by all on my account; [21:18]and a hair of your heads
shall by no means perish; [21:19]by your patience you shall save your
souls.

3 [21:20]But when you see Jerusalem surrounded with encampments, then
know that its desolation is at hand. [21:21]Then let those in Judea
flee to the mountains; and those in the midst of it depart out of it;
and let those in country places not enter into it. [21:22]For these are
days of judgment, that all things which are written may be fully
accomplished. [21:23]But woe to those with child, and having children
at the breast in those days; for there shall be great distress on the
earth, and wrath against this people. [21:24]And they shall fall by the
edge of the sword, and be carried away captive to all nations, and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down by gentiles, till the times of gentiles
are fully accomplished.

4 [21:25]And there shall be signs in the sun, and moon, and stars; and
on the earth distress of nations, with perplexity [at] the roaring of
the sea and waves, [21:26]men dying with fear and an expectation of
evils to come on the world; for the hosts of the heavens shall be
shaken. [21:27]And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud
with power and great glory.  [21:28]When these things begin to occur,
arise and lift up your heads, for your redemption is near.

5 [21:29]And he spoke to them a parable; See the fig tree and all the
trees; [21:30]when they now put forth, observing you know of yourselves
that summer already is nigh; [21:31]so, also, when you see all these
things occur, know that the kingdom of God is nigh.  [21:32]I tell you
truly, that this generation shall by no means pass away till all these
things are accomplished. [21:33] Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my words shall not pass away.  [21:34]Take heed to yourselves, that
your hearts be not oppressed with revelling and drunkenness, and
worldly cares, and that day come upon you suddenly; [21:35]for it shall
come like a snare on all who live on the face of the whole earth.
[21:36]But watch continually, praying that you may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things which are about to occur, and to stand
before the Son of man.

6 [21:37]And he taught during the days in the temple, and went out and
spent the nights on the mountain called the Mount of Olives. [21:38]And
all the people came early to him in the temple to hear him.




