CHAPTER XXVIII. JUDAS AGREES TO BETRAY HIS MASTER, THE LAST SUPPER, AMBITION DISCOURAGED, THE DISCIPLES WARNED.


1 [22:1]AND the feast of unleavened bread approached, called the
passover. [22:2]And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might
destroy him, for they feared the people. [22:3]And Satan entered into
Judas, called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve; [22:4]and
he went and conferred with the chief priests and commanders as to how
he might deliver him to them. [22:5]And they were glad, and agreed to
give him money. [22:6]And he promised, and sought a convenient
opportunity to betray him to them in the absence of the people.

2 [22:7]And the day of unleavened bread came, in which it was necessary
to kill the paschal lamb. [22:8]And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go,
prepare for us the passover, that we may eat.  [22:9]And they said to
him, Where do you wish us to prepare?  [22:10]And he said to them,
Behold, as you enter into the city, a man will meet you, bearing an
earthen vessel of water; follow him into the house where he enters,
[22:11]and say to the master of the house, The teacher says to you,
where is the public room in which I may eat the passover with my
disciples? [22:12]And he will show you a large upper room furnished;
there prepare.  [22:13]And they went and found as he had said to them
and prepared the passover.

3 [22:14]And when the hour had come, he sat down, and the apostles with
him; [22:15]and he said to them, I have greatly desired to eat this
passover with you before I suffer; [22:16]for I tell you that I will
eat it no more till it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God. [22:17]And
taking a cup, he gave thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among
you; [22:18]for I tell you that I will not drink of the product of the
vine, till the kingdom of God has come. [22:19] And taking bread, and
giving thanks, he broke and gave them, saying, This is my body given
for you; this do in remembrance of me. [22:20]And the cup in like
manner, after supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant [sealed]
with my blood, which is poured out for you. [22:21]But behold, the hand
of the traitor is with me on the table; [22:22]for the Son of man goes
as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed.
[22:23]And they inquired among themselves which of them it was who was
about to do this.

4 [22:24]And there was a contention among them as to which of them
should be the greatest. [22:25]And he said to them, The kings of the
nations exercise lordship over them; and those having power are called
their benefactors. [22:26] But you shall not be so. But let the greater
among you be as the younger, and the chief as he that serves.
[22:27]For which is greater, he that reclines, or he that serves? Is
not he that reclines? But I am with you as he that serves. [22:28]And
you have continued with me in my trials, [22:29]and I appoint you, as
my Father has appointed me, a kingdom, [22:30]that you may eat and
drink at my table, in my kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.

5 [22:31]Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired you, to sift like
wheat; [22:32]but I have prayed for you, that your faith may not
entirely fail; and when you recover yourself, confirm your brothers.
[22:33]And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison
and to death. [22:34]And he said, I tell you, Peter, a cock shall not
crow today, before you shall deny thrice that you know me.

6 [22:35]And he said to them, When I sent you out without a purse, and
provision sack, and sandals, did you want any thing?  And they said,
Nothing. [22:36]Then he said to them, But now let him that has a purse
take it, and a provision sack likewise; and he that has not a sword,
let him sell his cloak and buy one.  [22:37]For I tell you, that this
which is written must be fully accomplished in me, And he was numbered
with transgressors; for also the things concerning me have an end.
[22:38]And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to
them, It is sufficient.




