CHAPTER XXIX. CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE AND BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM.


1 [22:39]AND going out, he went, according to his custom to the Mount
of Olives; and the disciples followed him. [22:40]And arriving at the
place, he said to them, Pray that you may not enter into trial.
[22:41]And he withdrew from them about a stone's throw, and kneeling
down, prayed, [22:42]saying, Father, if thou wilt, take this cup away
from me; but not my will, but thine be done. [22:43]And an angel
appeared to him from heaven, strengthening him. [22:44]And being in
agony, he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat was like large drops of
blood falling down to the ground. [22:45]And rising from prayer, and
coming to the disciples, he found them sleeping from grief, [22:46]and
he said to them, Why do you sleep? Arise, and pray that you may not
enter into trial.

2 [22:47]And while he was yet speaking, behold a multitude, and he that
was called Judas, one of the twelve, came before them, and he
approached Jesus to kiss him. [22:48]But Jesus said to him, Judas, do
you betray the Son of man with a kiss? [22:49]And those about him
seeing what was about to occur, said, Lord, shall we strike with the
sword? [22:50]And one of them struck the servant of the chief priest,
and took off his right ear.  [22:51]But Jesus answered and said, Suffer
even this; and touching his ear he healed him. [22:52]And Jesus said to
the chief priests, and commanders of the temple, and elders who came
against him, Have you come with swords and clubs, as against a robber?
[22:53] When I was daily with you in the temple you stretched not out
your hands upon me but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.

3 [22:54]And apprehending him, they led him away, and conducted him to
the house of the chief priest; and Peter followed at a distance.
[22:55]And they having kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and
sat down, Peter sat in the midst of them.  [22:56]And a certain female
servant seeing him sitting by the light, and looking steadily at him,
said, This man also was with him. [22:57] But he denied him, saying, I
do not know him, woman.  [22:58]And after a little, another seeing him,
said, You also are one of them. But Peter said, Man, I am not.
[22:59]And about an hour intervening, another strongly affirmed,
saying, Certainly, this man was also with him; for he is also a
Galilean. [22:60]But Peter said, Man, I know not what you say. And
immediately, while he was yet speaking, a cock crew. [22:61]And the
Lord turned and looked at Peter; and Peter was reminded of the Lord's
word, that he said to him, Before a cock crows to-day you shall deny me
thrice; [22:62]and going out, Peter wept bitterly.

4 [22:63]And the men having him in custody mocked him, beating him;
[22:64]and blindfolding him they asked him, saying, Prophecy who it is
that struck you? [22:65]And they reviled him with many other words.

5 [22:66]And when it was day, the eldership of the people, and the
chief priests, and scribes were assembled, and they brought him into
their sanhedrim, saying, [22:67]If you are the Christ, tell us? And he
said to them, If I tell you you will not believe; [22:68]and if I ask
you will not answer. [22:69]But from this time the Son of man will sit
on the right hand of the power of God. [22:70]And they all said, Are
you the Son of God then? And he said to them, I am as you say.
[22:71]And they said, What further need have we of testimony? for we
ourselves have heard from his mouth.




