CHAPTER XXX. CHRIST BEFORE PILATE AND HEROD, HIS CONDEMNATION.


1 [23:1]AND all the multitude arose and led him to Pilate.  [23:2]And
they accused him, saying, We have found this man perverting our nation,
and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, saying that he is an anointed
king. [23:3] And Pilate asked him, saying, Are you the king of the
Jews? And he answered and said to him, As you say. [23:4]And Pilate
said to the chief priests, and the multitudes, I find no fault with
this man. [23:5]And they were more violent, saying, He excites the
people, teaching in all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this
place. [23:6]And Pilate hearing of Galilee asked if the man was a
Galilean.  [23:7]And learning that he was of the province of Herod, he
sent him to Herod, who was himself also at Jerusalem in those days.

2 [23:8]And when Herod saw Jesus he was much pleased; for he had wished
for a long time to see him, because he had beard about him, and he
hoped to see some miracle performed by him. [23:9]And he questioned him
with many words; but he answered him nothing.  [23:10]And the chief
priests and scribes stood up, violently accusing him. [23:11]And Herod,
with his soldiers, treated him with contempt, and mocked him, and put
on him a splendid garment, and sent him back to Pilate. [23:12]And
Pilate and Herod became friends to each other on that day; for they had
before been enemies to each other.

3 [23:13]And Pilate having called the chief priests, and rulers, and
the people, [23:14]said to them, You have brought me this man as one
that perverts the people; and behold, having had an examination before
you, I have found in this man no cause for the charges which you bring
against him, [23:15]but neither has Herod, for I sent you to him, and
behold, nothing worthy of death has been done by him; [23:16]having
chastised him therefore, I will release him. [23:18]And the whole
multitude cried out, saying, Take away this man, and release to us
Barabbas; [23:19]who had been cast into prison for a certain sedition
made in the city, and a murder.

4 [23:20]Pilate therefore addressed them again, wishing to release
Jesus; [23:21]but they replied, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.
[23:22]And he said to them a third time, [Why], for what evil has this
man done? I have found no cause of death in him; having chastised him
therefore, I will release him.  [23:23]And they beset him with loud
cries, demanding that he should be crucified; and their cries, and
those of the chief priests, prevailed; [23:24] and Pilate answered,
that their demand should be granted. [23:25]And he released him that
was cast into prison for sedition and murder, whom they desired, and
delivered up Jesus to their will.




