CHAPTER XXXI. CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION, DEATH, AND BURIAL.


1 [23:26]AND when they led him away, they took Simon, a certain
Cyrenian, coming from the country, and put on him the cross to bear
after Jesus. [23:27] And there followed him a great multitude of the
people, and of women; and they bewailed and lamented him. [23:28]And
turning to them, Jesus said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for yourselves, and for your children. [23:29]For behold, days
come in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and those who
have not borne children, and the breasts which have not nursed them!
[23:30]Then shall they say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the
hills, Cover us; [23:31]for if they do these things with the green
tree, what shall be done with the dry? [23:32]And two other criminals
were led out to be put to death with him.

2 [23:33]And when they arrived at the place called Cranium, there they
crucified him, and the criminals; one on his right hand, and the other
on his left. [23:34]And Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do. And distributing his garments they cast lots [for
them]. [23:35]And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also
scoffed, saying, He saved others; if this is the Christ, the elect of
God, let him save himself.  [23:36]And the soldiers also mocked him,
and came and presented him vinegar, [23:37]and said, If you are the
king of the Jews, save yourself. [23:38]And there was an inscription
over him; THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

3 [23:39]And one of the criminals crucified, reviled him, [saying], Are
you not the Christ? save yourself and us.  [23:40]But the other
answered and rebuked him, and said, Do you not fear God, since you are
under the same sentence? [23:41]and we indeed justly, for we receive
the desert of our doings; but this man has done nothing amiss.
[23:42]And he said, Jesus, remember me when you come in your kingdom.
[23:43]And he said to him, I tell you truly, to-day you shall be with
me in paradise.

4 [23:44]And it was now about the sixth hour [noon]; and there was a
darkness over all the land till the ninth hour [3 P.M.].  [23:45]And
the sun was obscured; and the vail in the midst of the temple was rent
in two. [23:46]And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into
thy hands I commit my spirit; and having said this, he expired.
[23:47]And the centurion seeing what was done, glorified God, saying,
Truly this was a righteous man. [23:48]And all the multitudes who had
come together to this spectacle, beholding what was done, returned
beating their breasts. [23:49]And all his friends stood at a distance,
and the women who had followed him from Galilee, seeing these things.

5 [23:50]And behold, a man by the name of Joseph, a counsellor, a good
and righteous man, [23:51]this man had not consented to their design
and doing, [he was] from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, and he expected
the kingdom of God. [23:52]This man coming to Pilate asked for the body
of Jesus; [23:53]and taking it down, he wrapped it in linen, and laid
it in a tomb cut out of a rock, in which no man had yet been laid.
[23:54]And the day was the preparation; the sabbath was dawning.




