CHAPTER XXXII. CHRIST AFTER HIS RESURRECTION.


1 [23:55]AND women following him who had come up with him from Galilee
saw the tomb, and how his body was laid. [23:56]And they returned and
prepared spices and ointments, and rested on the sabbath, according to
the commandment.

2 [24:1]And on the first day of the week, early in the morning, they
came to the tomb bringing the spices which they had prepared. [24:2]And
they found the stone rolled away from the tomb; [24:3]and entering,
found not the body. [24:4] And while they were in doubt about this,
behold, two men stood by them in shining clothing. [24:5]And [the
women] being afraid, and bowing their faces to the earth, they said to
them, Why do you seek the living with the dead? [24:6] He is not here,
but is raised.  Remember how he told you while he was yet in Galilee,
[24:7]saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of wicked
men to be crucified, and on the third day rise again.  [24:8]And they
remembered his words; [24:9]and returning from the tomb related all
these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.  [24:10]And they were
the Magdalene Mary, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the
others with them, who told these things to the apostles. [24:11]And
their words appeared to them like idle talk; and they believed them not.

3 [24:13]And behold, two of them went the same day to a village about
sixty stadiums [7 miles] from Jerusalem, called Emmaus; [24:14]and they
conversed together of all these things which had happened. [24:15]And
as they conversed and reasoned together, Jesus also himself approaching
walked with them; [24:16] but their eyes were restrained that they did
not know him. [24:17]And he said to them, What reports are these which
you relate one to the other as you walk and are sad? [24:18]And one of
them answered, whose name was Cleopas, and said to him, Do you live
alone at Jerusalem and not know the things which have occurred in it in
these days? [24:19]And he said to them, What things? And they said to
him, The things relating to Jesus the Nazoraean, who was a prophet,
mighty in work and word before God and all the people; [24:20]and how
our chief priests and rulers delivered him up to the sentence of death,
and crucified him, [24:21]But we hoped that he was the one who was to
redeem Israel. But indeed, also, in addition to all these things, today
is the third day since these things occurred; [24:22]but some of our
women also astonished us, who being early at the tomb [24:23]and not
finding his body, came, saying that they had seen a vision of angels,
who said that he was alive. [24:24]And some of those with us went to
the tomb, and found even as the women had said; and him they saw not.

4 [24:25]And he said to them, O foolish men, and of a mind slow to
believe all that the prophets have spoken. [24:26]Ought not the Christ
to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?  [24:27]And from
Moses, and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself.  [24:28]And they approached
the village to which they were going; and he pretended to be going
farther. [24:29]And they urged him, saying, Remain with us, for it is
near evening, and the day is already past. And he went in to remain
with them; [24:30]and when he reclined with them, taking bread, he
blessed, and breaking, gave them. [24:31]And their eyes were opened,
and they knew him; and he vanished from their sight. [24:32]And they
said one to the other, Did not our hearts burn within us when he spoke
to us on the way? when he opened to us the Scriptures? [24:33]And
rising up the same hour they returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven, and those with them, assembled together, [24:34]saying, The
Lord has risen indeed and has appeared to Simon. [24:35]And they
related the things on the way, and how he was known to them by the
breaking of bread.

5 [24:36]And as they were saying these things he stood in the midst of
them; [24:37]and they being terrified and afraid, thought they saw a
spirit. [24:38] And he said to them, Why are you troubled? and why do
doubts arise in your minds? [24:39]See my hands and my feet, that I am
he; feel of me, and see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you
see me have. [24:41]And while they yet disbelieved from joy, and
wondered, he said to them, Have you any food here? [24:42]And they gave
him part of a broiled fish, and of a honeycomb; [24:43] and taking it,
he eat before them.

6 [24:44]And he said to them, These are my words which I spoke to you
while I was yet with you, that all things written in the law of Moses,
and Prophets, and Psalms, concerning me, must be fully accomplished.
[24:45]Then he opened their understanding to understand the Scriptures,
[24:46]and said to them, Thus it is written, that the Christ should
suffer, and rise from the dead on the third day, [24:47]and that a
change of mind and forgiveness of sins should be preached in his name
to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem. [24:48]You are witnesses of
these things.  [24:49]Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you;
but remain in the city till you are endued with power from on high.

7 [24:50]And he led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his
hands, blessed them; [24:51]and while he was blessing them he departed
from them. [24:52]And they returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
[24:53]and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God.





