THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. CHAPTER I. THE WORD.



1 [1:1]IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. [1:2]This [Word] was in the beginning with God.
[1:3]All things existed through him, and without him not one thing
existed, which existed. [1:4] In him was life, and the life was the
light of men; [1:5]and the light shone in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not.

2 [1:6]There was a man, sent by God, whose name was John.  [1:7]This
man came for a testimony, to testify of the light, that all might
believe through him. [1:8]He was not the light, but to testify of the
light. [1:9]The light was the true [light] which lights every man that
comes into the world. [1:10]He was in the world, and the world existed
through him, and the world knew him not. [1:11] He came to his own, and
his own received him not.  [1:12]But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become sons of God, to them that believe on his name,
[1:13]who are born not of superior blood, nor of a will of the flesh,
nor of a will of man, but of God.

3 [1:14]And the Word became flesh and tabernacled with us and we beheld
his glory, a glory as of an only child with a father, full of grace and
truth. [1:15]John testified of him, and cried, saying, This is the one
of whom I said, He that comes after me existed before me, for he was
before me. [1:16]For we all have received of his fullness, and grace
for grace; [1:17]for the law was given by Moses, the grace and truth
were by Jesus Christ.  [1:18]No one has ever seen God; the only Son,
who is in the bosom of the Father, he declared [him].




