CHAPTER II. CHRIST DECLARED TO BE THE MESSIAH, AND COMMENCING HIS MINISTRY.


1 [1:19]AND this is the testimony of John, when the Jews from Jerusalem
sent priests and Levites to ask him, Who are you?  [1:20]And he
confessed and denied not, and confessed, I am not the Christ. [1:21]And
they asked him, What then? are you Elijah?  And he said, I am not. Are
you the prophet? And he answered, No.  [1:22]Then they said to him, Who
are you? that we may give an answer to them that sent us; what say you
of yourself? [1:23]He said, I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as Isaiah the prophet
said.

2 [1:24]And those sent were of the Pharisees. [1:25]And they asked him,
and said to him, Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ,
nor Elijah, nor the prophet? [1:26]John answered them saying, I baptize
with water; but among you stands one whom you know not. [1:27]He is the
one coming after me, the strings of whose sandal I am not worthy to
untie. [1:28]These things occurred in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where
John was baptizing.

3 [1:29]On the next day he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, Behold
the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world.  [1:30]This is he
of whom I said, After me comes a man who was before me, for he was
before me. [1:31]And I knew him not; but that he might be made manifest
to Israel, for this reason have I come baptizing with water. [1:32]And
John testified saying, I saw the Spirit descend like a dove from
heaven, and it remained on him. [1:33]And I knew him not, but he that
sent me to baptize with water, he said to me, On whom you see the
Spirit descend and remain on him, this is he that baptizes with the
Holy Spirit.  [1:34]And I have seen and testified that this is the Son
of God.

4 [1:35]On the next day John was again standing, and two of his
disciples, [1:36]and looking at Jesus as he walked, he said, Behold the
Lamb of God. [1:37]And his two disciples heard him say this, and
followed Jesus. [1:38]And Jesus turning around, and seeing them
following, said to them, What do you seek? And they said to him, Rabbi,
which interpreted signifies Teacher, where do you stay? [1:39]He said
to them, Come and see. Then they went and saw where he staid, and staid
with him that day; it was about the tenth hour. [1:40]Andrew, the
brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard from John, and
followed him; [1:41]he first found his brother Simon, and said to him,
We have found the Messiah; which is interpreted, Christ [Anointed].
[1:42]He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looking at him said, You are
Simon, the son of Jonas; you shall be called Cephas; which is
interpreted, Peter [Rock].

5 [1:43]On the next day he wished to go to Galilee, and he found
Philip. And Jesus said to him, Follow me. [1:44]Now Philip was from
Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter. [1:45]Philip found
Nathanael, and said to him, We have found him of whom Moses in the law,
and the prophets, wrote, Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazareth.
[1:46]And Nathanael said to him, Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip said to him, Come and see.  [1:47]Jesus saw Nathanael
coming to him, and said of him, See an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile. [1:48]Nathanael said to him, Whence do you know me? Jesus
answered and said to him, Before Philip called you, when you were under
the fig tree I saw you. [1:49]Nathanael answered him, Rabbi, you are
the Son of God; you are the King of Israel. [1:50]Jesus answered and
said to him, Because I said to you I saw you under the fig tree, do you
believe? You shall see greater things than these. [1:51]And he said to
him, I tell you most truly, you shall see heaven opened and the angels
of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.




