CHAPTER III. CHRIST CHANGING WATER INTO WINE, RESIDING AT CAPERNAUM, AND PURIFYING THE TEMPLE.


1 [2:1]AND on the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and
the mother of Jesus was there; [2:2]and Jesus also was invited, and his
disciples, to the wedding. [2:3]And the wine falling short the mother
of Jesus said to him, They have no wine.  [2:4]Jesus said to her, What
have you to do with me, woman? My hour has not yet come. [2:5]His
mother said to the servants, Do whatever he tells you. [2:6]And there
were six stone water jars there, placed for the purification of the
Jews, containing two or three metretes [16.75 or 25.125 gallons] each.
[2:7]Jesus said to them, Fill the water jars with water; and they
filled them to the top. [2:8]And he said to them, Now draw out and bear
to the master of the feast; and they bore it. [2:9]And when the master
of the feast tasted of the water made wine, and knew not whence it
was,--but the servants knew who had drawn the water,--the master of the
feast called the bridegroom [2:10]and said to him, Every man first
presents the good wine, and when they have drunk freely, the poorer;
but you have kept the good wine till now.  [2:11]This first miracle did
Jesus perform at Cana in Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his
disciples believed on him.  [2:12]After this he went down to Capernaum,
he and his mother, and his brothers, and his disciples, and remained
there a few days.

2 [2:13]And the passover of the Jews was nigh; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. [2:14]And he found in the temple those that sold cattle, and
sheep, and doves, and the brokers sitting; [2:15]and making a whip of
cords he drove them all out of the temple, also the sheep and cattle,
and poured out the money of the brokers, and overturned the tables,
[2:16]and said to those that sold doves, Take these things hence; make
not my Father's house a house of merchandise. [2:17]And his disciples
remembered that it was written, The zeal of thy house consumes me.

3 [2:18]Then the Jews answered and said to him, What sign do you show
us, that you do these things? [2:19]Jesus answered and said to them,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it.  [2:20]Then the
Jews said to him, Forty-six years was this temple being built, and will
you raise it in three days? [2:21]But he spoke of the temple of his
body. [2:22]When, therefore, he was raised from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he said this, and they believed the Scripture and the
word which Jesus spoke.




