CHAPTER VIII. JOHN THE BAPTIST QUESTIONING CHRIST'S MESSIAHSHIP.


1 [11:2]AND John hearing in the prison of the works of Christ, sending
by his disciples, [11:3]said to him, Are you he that was coming, or
look we for another? [11:4]And Jesus answered and said to them, Go and
tell John what you see and hear; [11:5]the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the
poor have the good news preached to them; [11:6]and blessed is he that
is not offended with me.

2 [11:7]And when they had gone, Jesus began to say to the multitudes,
concerning John, What went you out to the wilderness to see? A reed
shaken with the wind? [11:8]But what went you out to see? A man wearing
fine clothes? Behold, they that wear fine clothes are in the houses of
kings. [11:9]But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you,
and more than a prophet.  [11:10]For this is he of whom it is written;
Behold, I send my messenger before your face, to prepare your way
before you.  [11:11]I tell you truly, there has not arisen among those
born of woman a greater than John the Baptist; but the least in the
kingdom of heaven is greater than he. [11:12]And from the days of John
the Baptist till now the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. [11:13]For all the prophets and the law
prophesied till John. [11:14]And if you will receive it, this is
Elijah, who was to come.

3 [11:15]He that has ears, let him hear. [11:16]To what shall I liken
this generation? It is like little children sitting in the markets, who
call to their companions, [11:17]and say, We have played on pipes for
you, and you have not danced; we have mourned, and you have not
lamented. [11:18]For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they
say, He has a demon; [11:19]the Son of man came eating and drinking,
and they say, Behold a glutton, and a wine drinker, a friend of
publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified by her children.

4 [11:20]Then he began to rebuke those cities in which most of his
mighty works had been done, because they changed not their minds.
[11:21]Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! for if the mighty
works which have been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they
would have changed their minds long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
[11:22]But I tell you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in
a day of judgment than for you.  [11:23]And you, Capernaum, which are
exalted even to heaven, shall go down even to hades; for if the mighty
works which have been done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained to this day. [11:24]But I tell you, that it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom in a day of judgment, than for you.

5 [11:25]At that time Jesus answering said, I thank thee, Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and
intelligent, and hast revealed them to babes.  [11:26]Yes, Father, for
so it has seemed good in thy sight.  [11:27]All things are given me by
my Father; and no one knows the Son but the Father; and no one knows
the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
[11:28]Come to me all you that labor hard and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.  [11:29]Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest for your souls;
[11:30]for my yoke is easy, and my burden light.




