CHAPTER V. CHRIST BAPTIZING, AND PREACHING TO THE SAMARITANS.


1 [3:22]AFTER these things Jesus and his disciples came into the
country of Judea; and there he staid with them, and baptized.
[3:23]And John also was baptizing at AEnon, near Salim, because there
were many waters there; and they came and were baptized, [3:24]for John
was not yet cast into prison. [3:25] Then there was a controversy of
the disciples of John with a Jew concerning purification. [3:26]And
they came to John and said to him, Rabbi, he that was with you beyond
the Jordan, to whom you testified, behold, this [man] baptizes and all
men come to him. [3:27]John answered and said, A man can receive
nothing unless it is given him from heaven. [3:28]You yourselves bear
me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but am sent before him.
[3:29]He that has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the
bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly at the
bridegroom's voice; this my joy, therefore, is fully attained.
[3:30]He must increase, but I must decrease. [3:31]He that comes from
above is above all; he that is of the earth is of the earth, and speaks
of the earth. He that comes from heaven is above all; [3:32] and what
he has seen and heard this he testifies; and no one receives his
testimony. [3:33]He that receives his testimony has sealed that God is
true. [3:34]For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for God
gives not the Spirit by measure.  [3:35]The Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand. [3:36]He that believes on the Son
has eternal life; but he that disbelieves the Son shall not see life,
but the wrath of God continues on him.

2 [4:1]When, therefore, the Lord knew that the Pharisees heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, [4:2]though Jesus
himself indeed baptized not, but his disciples, [4:3]he left Judea and
departed again to Galilee. [4:4]And it was necessary that he should
pass through Samaria. [4:5] He came, therefore, to a city of Samaria
called Sychar, near the lot which Jacob gave his son Joseph. [4:6]And
Jacob's well was there.  Jesus, therefore, being fatigued with
travelling sat thus by the well; it was about the sixth hour [noon].
[4:7]A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, Give me
a drink; [4:8]for his disciples had gone away into the city to buy
provisions.  [4:9]Then the Samaritan woman said to him, How do you,
being a Jew, ask a drink of me, who am a Samaritan? for the Jews do no
business with the Samaritans. [4:10]Jesus answered and said to her, If
you knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to you, Give me a
drink, you would have asked him, and he would have given you living
water. [4:11]The woman said to him, Sir, you have nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep; whence then have you the living water? [4:12]Are
you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and who drank
of it himself, and his sons, and his cattle? [4:13]Jesus answered and
said to her, Every one that drinks of this water will thirst again;
[4:14]but whoever drinks of the water which I will give him shall never
thirst; but the water which I will give him shall be in him a fountain
of water springing up to eternal life. [4:15]The woman said to him,
Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, nor come here to draw.
[4:16]He said to her, Go and call your husband, and come here.
[4:17]The woman answered and said, I have no husband.  Jesus said to
her, You have said well, I have no husband; [4:18]for you have had five
husbands, and he whom you now have is not your husband. In this you
have spoken truly.

3 [4:19]The woman said to him, Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet.
[4:20] Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and you say that
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.  [4:21]Jesus said to
her, Believe me, woman, the hour comes, when neither in this mountain,
nor in Jerusalem, you shall worship the Father. [4:22]You worship what
you know not; we worship what we know; for salvation is of the Jews.
[4:23]But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him.  [4:24]God is a Spirit, and those that worship him must
worship in spirit and truth. [4:25]The woman said to him, I know that
the Messiah is coming, called Christ; when he comes he will tell us all
things. [4:26]Jesus said to her, I that speak to you am [the Messiah].

4 [4:27]And upon this his disciples came, and wondered that he talked
with the woman; but no one said to him, What do you seek?  or why do
you talk with her? [4:28]Then the woman left her bucket, and went to
the city, and said to the men, [4:29]Come and see a man who has told me
all things which I have done; is this the Christ? [4:30]They came out
from the city and came to him.

5 [4:31]In the meantime the disciples asked him saying, Rabbi, eat.
[4:32]But he said to them, I have food to eat which you know not of.
[4:33]Then the disciples said one to another, Has any one brought him
food to eat? [4:34]Jesus said to them, My food is to do the will of him
that sent me, and to finish his work. [4:35]Do you not say, There are
yet four months, and the harvest comes?  behold, I say to you, lift up
your eyes and see the fields; for they are white for a harvest.
[4:36]Already he that reaps receives wages and gathers fruit for life
eternal, that he that sows and he that reaps may rejoice together.
[4:37] For in this is the saying true; He that sows is one, and he that
reaps is another. [4:38]I have sent you to reap that on which you have
not labored; others have labored and you have entered into their labor.

6 [4:39]And many of the Samaritans in that city believed on him, on
account of the word of the woman, testifying, He told me all things
which I have done. [4:40]When, therefore, the Samaritans came to him,
they desired him to remain with them; and he remained there two days.
[4:41]And many more believed on account of his word, [4:42]and said to
the woman, We no longer believe on account of your report, for we have
heard him ourselves, and know that this is truly the Saviour of the
world.




