CHAPTER VII. CHRIST CURING A SICK MAN ON THE SABBATH, AT JERUSALEM.


1 [5:1]AFTER these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem. [5:2]And there is at Jerusalem, by the sheep-gate, a
pool, called in Hebrew, Bethesda, having five porches. [5:3]In these
lay a multitude of sick, blind, lame, withered. [5:5]And there was a
certain man there who had been sick thirty-eight years. [5:6]Jesus
seeing him lying, and knowing that he had now been sick a long time,
said to him, Do you wish to become well? [5:7]The sick man answered
him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is disturbed, to put me into
the pool; but while I am coming another goes down before me. [5:8]Jesus
said to him, Arise, take up your bed and walk. [5:9]And the man
immediately became well, and took up his bed and walked. That day was
the sabbath.

2 [5:10]The Jews, therefore, said to him that was cured, It is the
sabbath; it is not lawful for you to carry the bed. [5:11]He answered
them, He that made me well, he said to me, Take up your bed and walk.
[5:12]They asked him, Who is the man that said to you, Take up your bed
and walk? [5:13]And the sick man knew not who it was; for Jesus had
gone away, a multitude being in that place. [5:14]Afterwards Jesus
found him in the temple, and said to him, Behold, you have become well;
sin no more, lest a worse thing happen to you. [5:15]The man went away
and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well; [5:16]and on
this account the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he had done these
things on the sabbath. [5:17]But Jesus answered them, My Father works
even till now, and I work. [5:18]Then, for this reason, the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he not only broke the sabbath but also
said, that God was his Father, making himself equal with God.
[5:19]Then Jesus answered and said to them, I tell you most truly, the
Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for
whatever he does, these things also does the Son in like manner.
[5:20]For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things which he
does; and greater works than these will he show him, that you may
wonder. [5:21]For as the Father raises the dead, and makes them alive,
so also the Son makes alive whom he will. [5:22]For the Father judges
no man, but has given all judgment to the Son, [5:23]that all should
honor the Son as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son
honors not the Father that sent him.

3 [5:24]I tell you most truly, he that hears my word and believes him
that sent me has eternal life, and comes not into judgment, but has
passed from death to life. [5:25]I tell you most truly, that the hour
comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and those that hear shall live.  [5:26]For as the Father has life
in himself, so has he also given to the Son to have life in himself;
[5:27]and has given him authority and judgment to execute, because he
is the Son of man.  [5:28]Wonder not at this; for the hour comes in
which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice [5:29]and shall
come forth; those that have done good to a resurrection of life, and
those that have done evil to a resurrection of judgment. [5:30]I can do
nothing of myself; as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, for I
seek not my will, but the will of him that sent me.

4 [5:31]If I testify of myself my testimony is not true.  [5:32]There
is another who testifies of me, and I know that the testimony which he
testifies of me is true. [5:33]You sent to John, and he testified to
the truth; [5:34]but I receive not testimony from a man; but I say
these things that you may be saved. [5:35]He was a burning and shining
light, and you were willing for a time to rejoice in his light.
[5:36]But I have greater testimony than John's; for the works which the
Father has given me to finish, these works which I do, testify of me
that the Father has sent me; [5:37]and the Father who sent me, he has
testified of me. You have not heard his voice at any time, nor seen his
form; [5:38]and his word you have not continuing in you, for whom he
has sent, him you believe not. [5:39]You search the Scriptures, because
you think by them to have eternal life; and they testify of me;
[5:40]and you will not come to me that you may have life.

5 [5:41]I receive not glory from men, [5:42]but I know you, that you
have not the love of God in you. [5:43]I have come in my Father's name
and you receive me not; if another comes in his own name, him will you
receive. [5:44]How can you believe, receiving glory one from another,
and the glory from God alone you seek not? [5:45]Think not that I will
accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuses you, Moses, in whom
you trust. [5:46]For if you had believed Moses, you would have believed
me; for he wrote of me. [5:47]But if you believe not his writings, how
will you believe my words?




