CHAPTER VIII. CHRIST FEEDING FIVE THOUSAND, AND WALKING ON THE LAKE.

1 [6:1]AFTER these things Jesus went across the lake of Galilee, the
Tiberias. [6:2]And a great multitude followed him, because they saw the
miracles which he performed on the sick. [6:3]And Jesus went up on the
mountain and sat there with his disciples.  [6:4]And the passover was
nigh, the feast of the Jews. [6:5]Then Jesus lining up his eyes, and
seeing many people come to him, said to Philip, Whence shall we buy
bread that these may eat?

2 [6:6]But this he said to try him; for he knew what he was about to
do. [6:7] Philip answered him, Two hundred denarii [$28] worth of bread
is not sufficient for them, that each may take a little.  [6:8]One of
his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to him, [6:9]There
is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fishes; but what are
these for so many? [6:10]Jesus said, Make the men sit down. And there
was much grass in the place. The men, therefore, sat down in number
about five thousand. [6:11]Then Jesus took the bread, and having given
thanks, distributed it to those reclining; likewise also of the fishes,
as much as they wished. [6:12]And when they were filled he said to his
disciples, Collect the fragments that remain over, that nothing may be
lost.  [6:13]Then they collected, and filled twelve traveling-baskets
with the fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over to
those who had eaten.

3 [6:14]Then the men, seeing what a miracle Jesus had performed, said,
This is truly the prophet who was to come into the world.  [6:15]And
Jesus knowing that they were about to come and take him by force to
make him a king, went up to the mountain himself alone.

4 [6:16]And when it was evening, his disciples went down to the lake,
[6:17] and entering into the ship were crossing the lake to Capernaum.
And it was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them, [6:18]and the lake
was made rough by a great wind blowing.  [6:19]Then having gone about
twenty-five or thirty stadiums [3 or 3 1-2 miles], they saw Jesus
walking on the lake and coming near the ship, and they were afraid.
[6:20]But he said to them, It is I; be not afraid. [6:21] Then they
willingly took him into the ship, and immediately the ship was at the
land to which they were going.




