CHAPTER IX. CHRIST AT CAPERNAUM PROCLAIMING HIMSELF THE SON OF GOD AND THE BREAD OF LIFE.


1 [6:22]ON the next day, the multitude standing on the other side of
the lake seeing that there was no other boat there except one, and that
Jesus entered not into the ship with his disciples but his disciples
had gone away alone,-- [6:23] but other boats came from Tiberias near
the place where they had eaten bread after the Lord gave thanks,--
[6:24]when, therefore, the multitude saw that Jesus was not there,
neither his disciples, they went into the ships and came to Capernaum,
seeking Jesus. [6:25]And finding him on the other side of the lake they
said to him, Rabbi, when came you hither? [6:26]Jesus answered them and
said, I tell you most truly, you seek me not because you saw miracles,
but because you eat of the bread and were filled. [6:27]Work not for
the food which perishes, but for the food which endures to eternal
life, which the Son of man will give you; for him has God the Father
sealed.

2 [6:28]Then they said to him, What shall we do to perform the works of
God? [6:29]Jesus answered and said to them, This is the work of God; to
believe on him whom he has sent. [6:30]Then they said to him, What
miracle do you perform, that we may see and believe you? what work do
you perform? [6:31]Our fathers eat the manna in the wilderness, as it
is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. [6:32]Then Jesus
said to them, I tell you most truly, Moses gave you not bread from
heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven; [6:33]for
the bread of God is he that comes down from heaven and gives life to
the world.

3 [6:34]Then they said to him, Sir, always give us this bread.
[6:35]Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life; he that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst.
[6:36]But I said to you, that you have seen me and believe not.
[6:37]Every thing which the Father gives to me shall come to me, and
him that comes to me I will by no means cast out; [6:38]for I came down
from heaven not to do my will, but the will of him that sent me.
[6:39]And this is the will of him that sent me; that I should lose
nothing of all that he has given me, but should raise it up at the last
day. [6:40]For this is the will of my Father, that every one who sees
the Son and believes in him should have eternal life; and I will raise
him up at the last day.

4 [6:41]Then the Jews complained of him because he said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven. [6:42]And they said, Is not this Jesus,
the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?  how, then, does he
say, I came down from heaven? [6:43]Then Jesus answered and said to
them, Complain not among yourselves.  [6:44]No one can come to me
unless the Father who sent me shall draw him; and I will raise him up
at the last day. [6:45]It is written in the prophets, And all shall be
taught of God. Every one who has heard and learned of the Father comes
to me.  [6:46]Not that any one has seen the Father except he that is
from God; he has seen the Father.

5 [6:47]I tell you most truly, He that believes has eternal life.
[6:48]I am the bread of life. [6:49]Your fathers eat manna in the
wilderness, and died; [6:50]this is the bread which comes down from
heaven, that one may eat of it and not die. [6:51]I am the living bread
which came down from heaven; if any one eats of this bread, he shall
live forever; and the bread which I will give for the life of the world
is my flesh.

6 [6:52]Then the Jews contended one with another, saying, How can this
man give us his flesh to eat? [6:53]Then Jesus said to them, I tell you
most truly, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, you have no life in you. [6:54]He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
[6:55]For my flesh is the true food, and my blood is the true drink.
[6:56]He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood continues in me, and I
in him. [6:57]As the living Father sent me and I live by the Father, so
he that eats me shall live by me. [6:58]This is the bread which came
down from heaven; not as your fathers eat and died, he that eats this
bread shall live forever. [6:59]These things he said in a synagogue,
teaching in Capernaum.

7 [6:60]Then many of his disciples hearing him said, This is a hard
saying; who can hear him? [6:61]And Jesus knowing in himself that his
disciples complained of this, said to them, Does this offend you?
[6:62][What], then if you should see the Son of man ascend where he was
formerly? [6:63]The Spirit is that which makes alive; the flesh profits
nothing; the words which I have spoken to you are spirit and life.
[6:64]But there are some of you who believe not. For Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that believed not, and who he was that
would betray him.  [6:65]And on that account he said, I told you that
no one can come to me unless it has been given him by my Father.

8 [6:66]From this time many of his disciples went away from following
him, and walked no more with him. [6:67]Then Jesus said to the twelve
Will you also go away? [6:68]Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom
shall we go? you have words of eternal life, [6:69]and we have believed
and know that you are the Holy [Son] of God. [6:70]He answered them,
Have I not chosen you twelve? and of you one is a devil. [6:71]But he
spoke of Judas the son of Simon Iscariot, for he was about to betray
him, being one of the twelve. [7:1]And after these things Jesus walked
in Galilee, for he would not walk in Judea because the Jews sought to
kill him.




