CHAPTER X. CHRIST AT THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES.


1 [7:2]AND the feast of the Jews was nigh, the feast of tabernacles.
[7:3]Then his brothers said to him, Go down from here, and go into
Judea, that your disciples also may see your works which you do;
[7:4]for no one does any thing in secret, and seeks himself to be in
public. If you do these things, show yourself to the world. [7:5]For
his brothers did not believe on him. [7:6]Then Jesus said to them, My
time has not yet come, but your time is always ready. [7:7]The world
cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it that its
works are evil.  [7:8]Do you go up to the feast; I go not up to this
feast, because my time has not yet fully come. [7:9]Having said these
things he continued in Galilee.

2 [7:10]But when his brothers had gone up, then he also went up to the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. [7:11]Then the Jews sought
him at the feast, and said, Where is he?  [7:12]And there was much
complaining concerning him among the multitude; some said, He is a good
man; others said, No; but he deceives the people. [7:13]Nevertheless,
no one spoke openly for him from fear of the Jews.

3 [7:14]And in the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and
taught. [7:15]Then the Jews wondered, saying, How does this man know
letters, not having learned? [7:16]Then Jesus answered them and said,
My teaching is not mine but his that sent me. [7:17]If any one will do
his will, he shall know of the teaching whether it is from God or
whether I speak from myself.  [7:18]He that speaks from himself seeks
his own glory; but he that seeks the glory of him that sent him, this
[man] is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. [7:19]Did not Moses
give you the law? and no one of you performs the law. Why do you seek
to kill me? [7:20]The multitude answered, You have a demon; who seeks
to kill you? [7:21]Jesus answered and said to them, I performed one
work and you all wonder. [7:22]Moses gave you circumcision, not that it
is of Moses but of the fathers, and you circumcise a man on the
sabbath. [7:23]If a man receives circumcision on the sabbath, that the
law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because I made a
man entirely sound on the sabbath? [7:24]Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge a righteous judgment.

4 [7:25]Then some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem said, Is not this he
whom they seek to kill? [7:26]And behold, he speaks boldly, and they
say nothing to him. Have the rulers at length learned that this is the
Christ? [7:27]But we know this man whence he is; but when the Christ
comes, no one knows whence he is. [7:28]Then Jesus cried, teaching in
the temple and saying, You both know me and know whence I am; and I
have not come of myself; but he that sent me is true, whom you know
not; [7:29]I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.
[7:30]Then they sought to take him by force; but no man laid a hand on
him, for his hour had not yet come.

5 [7:31]And many of the multitude believed on him, and said, When the
Christ comes will he perform more miracles than this man has performed?
[7:32]The Pharisees heard the multitude saying these things concerning
him, and the chief priests and Pharisees sent to take him by force.
[7:33]Then Jesus said, Yet a little while am I with you, and I go to
him that sent me. [7:34]You shall seek and shall not find, and where I
am you cannot come. [7:35]Then the Jews said one to another, Where is
this man about to go, that we shall not find him? Will he go to the
dispersion of the Greeks, and teach the Greeks? [7:36]What does the
word which he said mean; You shall seek and shall not find me, and
where I am you cannot come?

6 [7:37]And on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any one thirsts, let him come to me and drink.
[7:38]He that believes in me, as the Scripture has said, out of him
shall flow rivers of living water. [7:39]But he said this of the Spirit
which those believing in him were about to receive; for the Spirit was
not yet [given], because Jesus was not yet glorified. [7:40]Then some
of the multitude hearing these words, said, This is truly the prophet;
[7:41]others said, This is the Christ; others said, [No]; for does the
Christ come from Galilee? [7:42]Has not the Scripture said that the
Christ comes from the offspring of David, and from Bethlehem, the
village where David was? [7:43]Then there was a division among the
multitude on his account; [7:44]and some of them wished to take him by
force, but no one laid hands on him.

7 [7:45]Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees, and
they said to them, Why have you not brought him?  [7:46]The officers
answered, A man never spoke thus. [7:47]The Pharisees answered them,
Are you also deceived? [7:48]Has any one of the rulers believed on him,
or of the Pharisees? [7:49] But this multitude which know not the law
are accursed.  [7:50]Nicodemus, he that came to him, being one of them,
said to them, [7:51]Does our law judge a man unless it first hears from
him and knows what he does? [7:52]They answered and said to him, Are
you also from Galilee? search and see; for no prophet is raised up from
Galilee.

8 [7:53][An early interpolation, but probably true]. And every man went
to his own house; [8:1]and Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. [8:2]And
in the morning he went again to the temple, and all the people came to
him, and he sat and taught them. [8:3]And the scribes and Pharisees
brought him a woman taken in adultery, and placing her in the midst
[8:4]said to him, Teacher, this woman was taken in adultery, in the
very act. [8:5]In the law, Moses commanded us that such should be
stoned; what therefore do you say? [8:6]They said this to try him, that
they might have something of which to accuse him. But Jesus, stooping
down, wrote with his finger on the ground. [8:7]And when they continued
asking him, rising up, he said to them, Let him that has not sinned
among you first cast the stone at her. [8:8]And again stooping down he
wrote on the ground. [8:9]But they hearing, and being convicted by
their consciences, went out, one by one, beginning with the oldest,
even to the last; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in
the midst. [8:10]And Jesus rising up and seeing no one but the woman,
said to her, Woman, where are those your accusers? Has no man condemned
you?  [8:11]And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said to her, Neither
do I condemn you; go, and sin no more.




