CHAPTER XI. CHRIST DECLARING HIMSELF THE SON OF GOD.


1 [8:12]THEN Jesus spoke to them again, saying, I am the light of the
world; he that follows me shall not walk in darkness but shall have the
light of life. [8:13]Then the Pharisees said to him, You testify of
yourself; your testimony is not true.  [8:14]Jesus answered and said to
them, Even if I testify of myself, my testimony is true, for I know
whence I came and whither I go; but you know not whence I come or
whither I go.  [8:15]You judge according to the flesh; I judge no one;
[8:16]and even if I judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone,
but I and the Father who sent me. [8:17]And it is written also in your
law, that the testimony of two men is true; [8:18]I am one, testifying
of myself, and the Father who sent me testifies of me.  [8:19]Then they
said to him, Where is your Father? Jesus answered, You have neither
known me nor my Father; if you had known me you would also have known
my Father. [8:20]These words he said in the treasury, teaching in the
temple; and no one took him by force, for his hour had not yet come.

2 [8:21]Then Jesus said to them again, I go away, and you shall seek me
and die in your sin; where I go, you cannot come.  [8:22]Then the Jews
said, Will he kill himself, that he says, Where I go you cannot come?
[8:23]And he said to them, You are from below; I am from above; you are
from this world; I am not from this world. [8:24]Therefore I said to
you, You shall die in your sins; for if you believe not that I am [the
Christ], you shall die in your sins. [8:25] Then they said to him, Who
are you? And Jesus said to them, What at the beginning, and what I tell
you [now]. [8:26]I have many things to say and judge of you; but he
that sent me is true; and what I have heard from him, these things I
speak in the world. [8:27]They understood not that he spoke to them of
the Father. [8:28]Then Jesus said to them, When you shall lift up the
Son of man, then shall you know that I am [the Christ]; and I do
nothing of myself; but I speak these things as the Father has taught
me; [8:29]and he having sent me is with me, he has not left me alone,
for I always do the things which please him.

3 [8:30]When he said these things many believed on him.  [8:31]Then
Jesus said to the Jews who believed on him, If you continue in my word,
you are my disciples indeed; [8:32]and you shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free.  [8:33]They answered him, We are
children of Abraham, and were never in servitude to any one; how say
you, You shall become free? [8:34]Jesus answered them, I tell you most
truly, that every one who commits sin is a servant of the sin.
[8:35]But the servant continues not in the house for ever; the Son
continues for ever. [8:36]If, therefore, the Son shall make you free,
you shall be free indeed. [8:37]I know that you are children of
Abraham; but you seek to kill me because my word has no place in you.
[8:38]What I have seen with my Father I speak, and you also do what you
have heard from your father. [8:39]They answered and said to him, Our
father is Abraham. Jesus said to them, If you were children of Abraham,
you would have done the works of Abraham; [8:40]but now you seek to
kill me, a man who has told you the truth, which I have heard from God;
Abraham did not do this. [8:41]You do the works of your father. They
said to him, We were not born by fornication, we have one father, God.
[8:42]Jesus said to them, If God was your father you would have loved
me; for I came forth and come from God; for I came not of myself, but
he sent me. [8:43]Why do you not understand my speech? because you
cannot hear my word. [8:44]You are of your father the devil, and the
desires of your father you will to do.  He was a murderer from the
beginning and stood not by the truth; for truth is not in him. When he
speaks a lie, he speaks from his own; for he is a liar, and the father
of him [that lies].  [8:45]But because I tell you the truth you believe
me not.  [8:46]Who of you convicts me of a sin? If I say the truth, why
do you not believe me? [8:47]He that is of God hears the words of God;
you, therefore, hear not, because you are not of God.

4 [8:48]The Jews answered and said to him, Say we not well that you are
a Samaritan, and have a demon? [8:49]Jesus answered, I have not a
demon; but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.  [8:50]But I seek
not my glory; there is one that seeks and judges. [8:51]I tell you most
truly, if any one shall keep my word he shall never see death.
[8:52]The Jews said to him, Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham
died, and the prophets; and you say, If any one shall keep my word he
shall never taste death. [8:53]Are you greater than our father Abraham,
who died?  and the prophets died; whom do you make yourself? [8:54]
Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing; it is my
Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, He is our God; [8:55]and you
have not known him, but I have known him; and if I should say I do not
know him, I should be a liar like you; but I know him and keep his
word. [8:56]Abraham your father rejoiced to see my day, and he saw, and
was glad. [8:57]Then the Jews said to him, You have not yet fifty
years, and have you seen Abraham?  [8:58]Jesus said to them, I tell you
most truly, that before Abraham existed, I am. [8:59]Then they took up
stones to cast at him; but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the
temple.




