CHAPTER XII. CHRIST CURING A MAN BORN BLIND, AND HIS PARABLE OF THE GOOD SHEPHERD.


1 [9:1]AND passing by he saw a man that was blind from birth; [9:2]and
his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his
parents, that he was born blind? [9:3]Jesus answered, Neither did this
man sin, nor his parents, but that the works of God might appear in
him. [9:4]I must perform the works of him that sent me, while it is
day; night comes when no man can work.  [9:5]While I am in the world I
am the light of the world.  [9:6]Saying these things he spit on the
ground, and made a paste of the spittle, and put the paste on his eyes,
[9:7]and said to him, Go, and wash in the pool of the Siloam; which is
interpreted, Sent. Then he went away and washed, and came seeing.

2 [9:8]Then the neighbors and those who had seen him before, because he
was a beggar, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? [9:9]Some said,
This is he; others said, No, but he is like him; he said, I am he.
[9:10]Then they said to him, How then were your eyes opened? [9:11]He
answered, A man called Jesus made paste and anointed my eyes, and said
to me, Go to the Siloam and wash; then I went and washed, and obtained
sight. [9:12]They said to him, Where is he? He said, I know not.

3 [9:13]They brought to the Pharisees him that was formerly blind;
[9:14]and it was on the sabbath when Jesus made the paste and opened
his eyes. [9:15]Then the Pharisees also asked him again how he obtained
sight. And he said to them, He put a paste on my eyes, and I washed,
and see. [9:16]Then some of the Pharisees said, This man is not of God,
for he does not keep the sabbath. Others said, How can a sinful man
perform such miracles?  And there was a division among them. [9:17]They
said to the blind man again, What do you say of him, because he opened
your eyes?  And he said, He is a prophet.

4 [9:18]Then the Jews did not believe of him that he had been blind and
received his sight, till they called the parents of him that had
received his sight. [9:19]And they asked them, saying, Is this your
son, of whom you say that he was born blind? How then does he now see?
[9:20]His parents answered and said, We know that this is our son, and
that he was born blind; [9:21]but how he now sees we know not, or who
has opened his eyes we know not; ask him, he is of age, he will speak
for himself. [9:22]His parents said these things because they feared
the Jews; for already the Jews had agreed that if any one confessed him
to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue; [9:23] therefore
his parents said, He is of age, ask him.

5 [9:24]Then they called the man who had been blind, a second time, and
said to him, Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.
[9:25]Then he answered, Whether he is a sinner I know not; one thing I
know, that having been blind, I now see.  [9:26]Then they said to him,
What did he do to you? how did he open your eyes? [9:27]He answered
them, I have told you already, and you did not hear; why do you wish to
hear again? Do you also wish to be his disciples? [9:28]They reproached
him, and said, You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.
[9:29]We know that God spoke to Moses, but we know not whence this man
is.  [9:30]The man answered and said to them, It is a strange thing,
that you know not whence he is, and he has opened my eyes.  [9:31]We
know that God hears not sinners; but if one is a worshipper of God, and
does his will, him he hears. [9:32]Since the world began it has not
been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind; [9:33]unless
this man was from God he would have been able to do nothing. [9:34]They
answered and said to him, You were born entirely in sins, and do you
teach us? And they cast him without.

6 [9:35]Jesus heard that they had cast him without, and finding him he
said to him, Do you believe in the Son of God? [9:36]And he answered
and said, Who is he, sir, that I shall believe on him? [9:37]Jesus said
to him, You have both seen him, and he that speaks to you is he.
[9:38]And he said, Lord, I believe, and worshipped him. [9:39]And Jesus
said, I came into this world for judgment, that those not seeing may
see, and those seeing become blind.

7 [9:40]And the Pharisees who were with him heard these things and said
to him, Are we also blind? [9:41]Jesus said to them, If you were blind
you would not have had sin; but now you say, We see, your sin remains.
[10:1]I tell you most truly, he that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbs in at some other place, he is a thief and robber;
[10:2]but he that enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
[10:3]To him the gate-keeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and
he calls his sheep by name, and leads them out. [10:4]When he puts out
all his sheep he goes before them, and the sheep follow him; for they
know his voice. [10:5]But a stranger they will not follow, but will
flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers.  [10:6]This
parable spoke Jesus to them, but they knew not what the words which he
spoke to them meant.

8 [10:7]Then said Jesus to them again, I tell you most truly, I am the
door of the sheep. [10:8]All who came before me are thieves and
robbers; but the sheep have not heard them. [10:9]I am the door; by me
if any one enters in he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find
pasturage. [10:10]The thief comes not, except to steal, and kill, and
destroy; I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly.

9 [10:11]I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd gives his life for
the sheep. [10:12]But the hired servant, and one who is not a shepherd,
who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep
and flees, and the wolf seizes and scatters them; [10:13]for he is a
hired servant and cares not for the sheep. [10:14]I am the good
shepherd, and I know mine and mine know me, [10:15]as the Father knows
me and I know the Father; and I give my life for the sheep.

10 [10:16]And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; and them I
must lead, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one flock,
one shepherd. [10:17]Therefore my Father loves me, because I lay down
my life that I may take it again. [10:18]No one takes it from me, but I
lay it down of myself. I have a right to lay it down, and I have a
right to take it again; this commandment have I received from my
Father. [10:19]There was a division again among the Jews on account of
these words; [10:20]and many of them said, He has a demon, and is mad;
why do you hear him? [10:21]Others said, These are not the words of a
demoniac; can a demon open the eyes of the blind?




