CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST AT THE FEAST OF THE DEDICATION, AND BEYOND THE JORDAN.


1 [10:22]IT was the dedication at Jerusalem; it was winter; [10:23]and
Jesus walked in the temple, in Solomon's porch.  [10:24]Then the Jews
came around him and said to him, How long do you hold our minds [in
doubt]? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly. [10:25]Jesus answered
them, I have told you and you believe not; the works which I perform in
my Father's name, these testify of me; [10:26]but you believe not,
because you are not of my sheep. As I said to you, [10:27]My sheep hear
my voice and I know them, and they follow me, [10:28]and I give them
eternal life, and they shall never perish nor shall any one pluck them
out of my hand. [10:29]My Father who gave [them] to me is greater than
all, and no one can pluck them out of my Father's hand.  [10:30]I and
the Father are one.

2 [10:31]Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.  [10:32]Jesus
answered them, Many good works have I shown you from the Father; for
which of these works do you stone me? [10:33]The Jews answered him, We
do not stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy, and because you,
being a man, make yourself God.  [10:34]Jesus answered them, Is it not
written in your law, I said you are gods? [10:35]If he called them gods
to whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken,
[10:36]do you tell him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the
world, You blaspheme, because I said, I am the Son of God? [10:37]If I
do not my Father's works, believe me not; [10:38]but if I do, though
you believe not me, believe the works, that you may know and understand
that the Father is in me and I in the Father.  [10:39]Then they sought
again to take him by force; and he escaped out of their hand.

3 [10:40]And he went away again beyond the Jordan to the place where
John first baptized, and continued there. [10:41]And many came to him
and said, John performed no miracle, but all things which John said of
this man were true. [10:42]And many believed on him there.




