CHAPTER IX. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH.


1 [12:1]AT that time Jesus went through the grain fields on the
sabbath; and his disciples were hungry, and began to pick the heads and
eat. [12:2]And the Pharisees seeing it, said to him, Behold, your
disciples do what it is not lawful to do on the sabbath. [12:3]But he
said to them, Have you not read what David did, when he was hungry, and
those who were with him? [12:4]how he entered into the house of God and
eat the show bread, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for
those with him, but only for the priests? [12:5]Or have you not read in
the law, that the priests profane the sabbath in the temple, and are
blameless?  [12:6]But I tell you that here is an object greater than
the temple. [12:7]But if you had known what, I wish for mercy and not a
sacrifice, means, you would not have condemned the innocent; [12:8]for
the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.

2 [12:9]And departing thence he went into their synagogue, [12:10]and
behold a man having a withered hand [was there]. And they asked him,
saying, Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath? that they might accuse
him. [12:11]And he said to them, What man is there of you having one
sheep, who if this falls into a pit on the sabbath, will not take hold
of it and lift it out? [12:12]How much then is a man better than a
sheep! So that it is lawful to do good on the sabbath. [12:13] Then he
said to the man, Stretch out your hand; and he stretched it out, and it
was restored as sound as the other; [12:14]and the Pharisees went out
and took counsel against him to destroy him.

3 [12:15]But Jesus knowing it departed thence, and great multitudes
followed him; and he cured them all, [12:16]and charged them not to
make him known; [12:17]that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Isaiah the prophet, saying; [12:18]Behold my servant, whom I have
chosen; my beloved, with whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my
spirit on him, and he shall declare judgment to the nations. [12:19]He
shall not strive nor cry aloud, nor shall any one hear his voice in the
streets.  [12:20]A bruised reed shall he not break, and a smoking flax
shall he not extinguish, till he sends forth judgment to victory.
[12:21]And in his name shall nations hope.




