CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST RAISING LAZARUS FROM THE DEAD.


1 [11:1]A CERTAIN man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of
Mary and Martha her sister. [11:2]It was the Mary who anointed the Lord
with ointment and wiped his feet with her hairs, whose brother Lazarus
was sick. [11:3]Then the sisters sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he
whom you love is sick.  [11:4] But Jesus hearing it said, This sickness
is not to death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be
glorified by it. [11:5]And Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and
Lazarus.  [11:6]When, therefore, he heard that he was sick, he
continued in the place where he was two days.

2 [11:7]Then after that he said to the disciples, Let us go again into
Judea. [11:8]The disciples said to him, Rabbi, the Jews lately sought
to stone you, and do you go there again?  [11:9]Jesus answered, Are
there not twelve hours of the day? and if one walks in the day he does
not stumble, because he sees the light of this world; [11:10]but if he
walks in the night he stumbles, because the light is not in it.
[11:11]He said these things, and after this he said to them, Our friend
Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I go that I may awake him. [11:12]Then
they said to him, Lord, if he has fallen asleep he will recover.
[11:13]But Jesus spoke of his death; but they thought that he spoke of
the rest of sleep. [11:14]Then Jesus, therefore, said to them plainly,
Lazarus has died; [11:15]and I am glad for your sakes that I was not
there, that you may believe; but let us go to him. [11:16]Then Thomas,
who is called The twin, said to the fellow disciples, Let us go also,
that we may die with him.

3 [11:17]Then Jesus coming found that he had been four days in the
tomb. [11:18]And Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadiums [1
3-4 miles] distant. [11:19]And many of the Jews came to those with
Martha and Mary, to console them for their brother.  [11:20]Then when
Martha heard that Jesus had come, she went out to meet him; but Mary
sat in the house. [11:21]Then Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had
been here, my brother would not have died; [11:22]but now also I know
that whatever you ask of God, God will give you. [11:23]Jesus said to
her, Your brother shall rise again. [11:24]Martha said to him, I know
that he will rise at the resurrection at the last day. [11:25]Jesus
said to her, I am the resurrection and the life; he that believes in
me, even if he has died, shall live, [11:26]and no one who lives and
believes in me shall ever die; do you believe this? [11:27]She said to
him, Yes, Lord; I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who
comes into the world.

4 [11:28]And having said this she went away and called Mary her sister,
privately, saying, The teacher has come and calls for you. [11:29]When
she heard, she arose quickly and came to him; [11:30]but Jesus had not
yet entered into the village, but was at the place where Martha met
him. [11:31]Then the Jews who were with her in the house and consoling
her, seeing Mary that she arose and went out quickly, followed her,
saying, She goes to the tomb to weep there. [11:32]Then Mary, when she
came where Jesus was, and saw him, fell down at his feet, saying to
him, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not have died.

5 [11:33]Then when Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping who came
with her, he was greatly agitated in spirit and affected, [11:34]and
said, Where have you laid him? They said to him, Lord, come and see.
[11:35]Jesus wept. [11:36]Then the Jews said, Behold, how he loved him.
[11:37]And some of them said, Could not this man who opens the eyes of
the blind, cause that even he should not have died? [11:38]Then Jesus
again being agitated within himself came to the tomb; it was a cave,
and a stone lay upon it. [11:39]Jesus said, Take away the stone.
Martha, the sister of the dead, said to him, Lord, by this time he
smells; for he has been dead four days. [11:40]Jesus said to her, Did I
not tell you that if you will believe you shall see the glory of God?
[11:41] Then they took away the stone. And Jesus lifted his eyes above,
and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me; [11:42]and I
knew that thou hearest me always; but for the sake of the multitude who
stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me.
[11:43]And having said these things, he cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus, come forth. [11:44]And the dead came forth, bound as to his
feet and hands with bandages, and his face was bound with a napkin.
Jesus said to them, Unbind him, and let him go.

6 [11:45]Then many of the Jews who came with Mary, and saw what Jesus
did, believed on him; [11:46]but some of them went away to the
Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.

7 [11:47]Then the chief priests and Pharisees convened the Sanhedrim,
and said, What do we accomplish? for this man performs many miracles.
[11:48]If we leave him thus all will believe on him; and the Romans
will come and take away our place and nation.  [11:49]And one of them,
Caiaphas, being chief priest that year, said to them, You know nothing
at all, [11:50]neither consider that it is expedient for us that one
man should die for the people, and not that all the nation should
perish. [11:51]This he said not of himself, but being chief priest that
year he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation;
[11:52]and not for the nation only, but to bring together into one
[body] all the children of God scattered abroad. [11:53]From that day,
therefore, they took counsel to kill him.

8 [11:54]Then Jesus walked no more openly among the Jews, but went
thence to a region near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim, and
there he staid with his disciples. [11:55]And the passover of the Jews
was nigh, and many went up from the country to Jerusalem, before the
passover, to purify themselves.  [11:56]Then they sought Jesus, and
standing in the temple said one to another, What do you think? that he
will not come to the feast? [11:57]And the chief priests and Pharisees
had given commandment, that if any one knew where he was he should make
it known, that they might take him by force.




