CHAPTER XV. CHRIST AT BETHANY, HIS TRIUMPHANT ENTRANCE INTO JERUSALEM, ETC.


1 [12:1]THEN Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethany,
where Lazarus was whom Jesus had raised from the dead.  [12:2]Then they
made him a supper there, and Martha served; but Lazarus was one of
those that reclined with him. [12:3]Then Mary taking a pound of genuine
nard, very costly, anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with
her hairs. And the house was filled with the odor of the ointment.
[12:4]But the Iscariot, one of his disciples, who was about to betray
him, said, [12:5]Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred
denarii [$42], and given to the poor? [12:6]But he said this, not that
he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the
treasure-chest, and carried off the things put in it. [12:7]Then Jesus
said, Let her alone, that she may keep this for the day of preparation
for my burial; [12:8]the poor you always have with you, but me you have
not always.

2 [12:9]A great multitude of the Jews, therefore, knew that he was
there, and came, not on account of Jesus only, but also to see Lazarus
whom he had raised from the dead. [12:10]And the chief priests took
counsel to kill Lazarus also, [12:11]because many of the Jews withdrew
on his account and believed in Jesus.

3 [12:12]On the next day a great multitude having come to the feast,
having heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, [12:13]took branches
of palm trees, and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel! [12:14]And
Jesus finding a young ass sat on it, as it is written; [12:15]Fear not,
Daughter of Zion; behold, your King comes sitting on the colt of an
ass. [12:16]His disciples did not understand these things at first; but
when Jesus was glorified then they remembered that these things were
written of him, and that they had done these things to him.  [12:17]The
multitude, therefore, which was with him, testified that he called
Lazarus from the tomb, and raised him from the dead. [12:18]On this
account also the multitude met him, because they heard that he had
performed this miracle. [12:19]The Pharisees, therefore, said among
themselves, You see that you have gained nothing; behold, the world has
gone after him.  [12:20]And there were some Greeks of those who went up
to Jerusalem to worship at the feast; [12:21]these, therefore, came to
Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir,
we wish to see Jesus. [12:22]Philip went and told Andrew, and again
Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus.  [12:23]And Jesus answered them,
saying, The hour has come that the Son of man should be glorified.
[12:24]I tell you most truly, that unless the kernel of wheat falls
into the earth and dies, it continues alone; but if it dies, it bears
much fruit. [12:25]He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that
hates his life in this world shall preserve it to eternal life.
[12:26]If any man serves me let him follow me; and where I am there
also shall my servant be. If anyone serves me, him will the Father
honor.  [12:27]Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father,
save me from this hour. But for this cause came I to this hour;
[12:28]Father, glorify thy name. Then came a voice from heaven, I have
both glorified and will glorify it again. [12:29]Then the multitude
standing and hearing, said, It was thunder; others said, An angel spoke
to him. [12:30] Jesus answered and said, This voice was not on my
account, but for you. [12:31] There is now a judgment of this world;
the ruler of this world shall now be cast out; [12:32]and if I am
raised on high from the earth I will draw all men to me. [12:33]But
this he said, signifying by what death he was about to die.

5 [12:34]Then the multitude answered him, We have heard from the law
that the Christ continues forever; and how say you, The Son of man must
be raised on high? Who is this Son of man?  [12:35]Then Jesus said to
them, Yet a little while is the light with you; walk while you have the
light, that darkness may not overtake you; for he that walks in
darkness knows not where he goes. [12:36] While you have the light,
believe in the light, that you may be children of light. Jesus said
these things, and went away and concealed himself from them.

6 [12:37]But though he had performed so many miracles before them they
did not believe in him; [12:38]that the word of Isaiah the prophet,
which he spoke, might be fulfilled; Lord, who has believed our report?
and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? [12:39]For this
reason they could not believe, because, Isaiah said again, [12:40]He
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not
see with their eyes and understand with their hearts, and be converted,
and I should cure them. [12:41]Isaiah said these things because he saw
his glory, and spoke of him. [12:42]Nevertheless, many of the rulers
believed on him, but on account of the Pharisees did not confess him,
lest they should be put out of the synagogues; [12:43]for they loved
the glory of men more than the glory of God.

7 [12:44]And Jesus cried and said, He that believes on me, believes not
on me but on him that sent me; [12:45]and he that beholds me beholds
him that sent me. [12:46]I have come a light into the world, that no
one who believes in me should continue in darkness. [12:47]And if any
one hears my words and keeps them not, I do not judge him; for I came
not to judge the world but to save the world. [12:48]He that rejects me
and receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word which I
have spoken, that shall judge him at the last day. [12:49] For I have
not spoken of myself; but the Father who sent me gave me commandment
what to say and what to speak; [12:50]and I know that his commandment
is eternal life. What things I speak, therefore, I so speak as the
Father has told me.




