CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST AT THE LAST SUPPER, AND HIS SERMON TO THE ELEVEN. 


1 [13:1]AND before the feast of the passover, Jesus knowing that his
hour had come to depart from this world to the Father, having loved his
own in the world he loved them to the end. [13:2]And supper being over,
the devil having already put it in the heart that Judas Iscariot, the
son of Simon, should betray him, [13:3]he knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, and that he came from God and was
going to God, [13:4]arose from supper, and laid aside his clothes, and
taking a towel girded himself: [13:5]Then he put water into the
wash-basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them
with the towel with which he was girded.

2 [13:6]Then he came to Simon Peter; he said to him, Lord, do you wash
my feet? [13:7]Jesus answered and said to him, What I do you know not
now, but you shall know hereafter. [13:8]Peter said to him, You shall
never by any means wash my feet. He answered him, Unless I wash you you
have no part with me. [13:9]Simon Peter said to him, Lord, not my feet
only, but my hands and my head.  [13:10] Jesus said to him, He that is
washed needs only that his feet should be washed, but is wholly pure;
and you are pure, but not all. [13:11]For he knew him that was to
betray him; therefore, he said, You are not all pure.

3 [13:12]When, therefore, he had washed their feet, and taken his
clothes and sat down again, he said to them, Do you know what I have
done to you? [13:13] You call me Teacher and Lord; and you say well,
for I am. [13:14]If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your
feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.  [13:15]For I have
given you an example, that you also should do as I have done. [13:16]I
tell you most truly, the servant is not greater than his lord, nor the
apostle greater than he that sent him. [13:17]If you know these things,
blessed are you if you do them. [13:18]I speak not of you all; I know
whom I have chosen; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, He that
eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me. [13:19]I tell you
from this time, before it occurs, that when it occurs you may believe
that I am [the Christ]. [13:20]I tell you most truly, He that receives
one that I send receives me; and he that receives me receives him that
sent me.

4 [13:21]Having said these things Jesus was troubled in spirit, and
testified and said, I tell you most truly, that one of you shall betray
me. [13:22]The disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he
spoke. [13:23]One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclining on
the bosom of Jesus. [13:24]Then Simon Peter made signs to this man, and
said to him, Ask who it is of whom he speaks. [13:25]He, falling down
on the breast of Jesus, said to him, Lord, who is it? [13:26]Then Jesus
answered, It is he to whom I will dip and give the mouthful. Then
dipping the mouthful, he took and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon
Iscariot. [13:27]And after the mouthful, then Satan entered into him.
Then Jesus said to him, What you do, do quickly. [13:28]No one of those
reclining knew for what purpose he said this to him, [13:29]for some
thought, since Judas had the treasure-chest, that Jesus said to him,
Buy what we need for the feast; or, that he should give something to
the poor. [13:30]He, therefore, having taken the mouthful, immediately
went out; and it was night.

5 [13:31]When he had gone out Jesus said, Now the Son of man has been
glorified, and God has been glorified in him. [13:32]If God has been
glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and will
immediately glorify him. [13:33]My little children, I am with you yet a
little while. You shall seek me, and as I said to the Jews, Where I go
you cannot come, I now also say to you.  [13:34]I give you a new
commandment to love another, as I have loved you that you also should
love one another. [13:35]By this shall all know that you are my
disciples, if you have love one for another. [13:36]Simon Peter said to
him, Lord, where do you go? Jesus answered Where I go you cannot follow
me now, but you shall follow afterwards. [13:37]Peter said to him,
Lord, why can I not follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.
[13:38]Jesus answered, Will you lay down your life for me? I tell you
most truly, a cock shall not crow till you shall deny me thrice.

6 [14:1]Let not your hearts be troubled; believe in God and believe in
me. [14:2]In my Father's house are many mansions; if there were not I
would have told you. [14:3]For I go to prepare a place for you; and if
I go and shall prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive
you to myself, that where I am you may also be. [14:4]And where I go,
you know the way. [14:5]Thomas said to him, Lord, we know not where you
go, and how do we know the way? [14:6] Jesus said to him, I am the way,
and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except by me.
[14:7]If you had known me you would have known my Father; and from this
time you know him and have seen him.

7 [14:8]Philip said to him, Lord, show us the Father, and we shall be
satisfied. [14:9]Jesus said to him, Have I been so long a time with you
and have you not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the
Father; and how say you, Show us the Father?  [14:10]Do you not believe
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words which I speak
to you I speak not of myself, but the Father continuing in me, he does
the works. [14:11]Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in
me; but if not, believe on account of the works themselves. [14:12]I
tell you most truly, he that believes on me, the works that I do shall
he do; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go to the
Father; [14:13]and whatever you ask in my name I will do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. [14:14]If you shall ask any thing
in my name, I will do it.

8 [14:15]If you love me, keep my commandments; [14:16]and I will pray
the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, to be with you
forever, [14:17] the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive,
because it beholds it not nor knows it; but you know it, because it
continues with you, and shall be in you.  [14:18]I will not leave you
orphans; I will come to you.  [14:19]Yet a little while and the world
beholds me no more; but you shall behold me; because I live, you shall
live also.  [14:20]In that day you shall know that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you. [14:21]He that has my commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved
by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him.

9 [14:22]Judas said to him, not the Iscariot, Lord, and how is it that
you are about to manifest yourself to us, and not to the world?
[14:23]Jesus answered and said to him, If any one loves me he will keep
my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make
our mansion with him. [14:24]He that loves me not, keeps not my words;
and the word which you hear is not mine, but the Father's that sent me.

10 [14:25]I have said these things to you while yet continuing with
you, [14:26]but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, which the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and remind you of all
things which I have told you. [14:27]Peace I leave with you; my peace I
give you; not as the world gives give I to you. Let not your hearts be
troubled, neither let them be afraid. [14:28]You heard that I said to
you, I will go away and come to you. If you loved me you would rejoice
because I go to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.
[14:29]And now I have told you before it occurs, that when it occurs
you may believe. [14:30]I will not speak with you much more; for the
ruler of this world comes and has nothing in me; [14:31]but [I have
said this] that the world may know that I love the Father, and that as
the Father has commanded me, so I do. Arise, let us go hence.




