CHAPTER XVII. CHRIST'S SERMON AFTER THE LAST SUPPER.


1 [15:1]I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
[15:2]Every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away; and every
branch that bears fruit he trims, that it may bear more fruit.
[15:3]You are now pure, by means of the word which I have spoken to
you; [15:4]continue in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear
fruit of itself unless it continues in the vine, so you cannot, unless
you continue in me. [15:5]I am the vine, you are the branches. He that
continues in me and I in him, this man bears much fruit; for separated
from me, you can do nothing.  [15:6]If any one continues not in me he
is cast without as a branch, and is withered; and they collect them and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. [15:7]If you continue in
me, and my words continue in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and
it shall be [given] you. [15:8]By this is my Father glorified, that you
bear much fruit and be my disciples. [15:9]As the Father has loved me,
I also have loved you; continue in my love. [15:10]If you keep my
commandments you shall continue in my love, as I have kept my Father's
commandments and continue in his love. [15:11]I have spoken these
things to you that my joy may be in you, and your joy be completed.
[15:12]This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have
loved you. [15:13]No man has greater love than this, that one should
give his life for his friends.  [15:14]You are my friends if you do
what I command you; [15:15]I no longer call you servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you friends:
for all things which I have heard from my Father I have made known to
you. [15:16]You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
appointed you to go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should
continue, that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give you.
[15:17]These things I charge you, that you love one another.

2 [15:18]If the world hates you, you know that it hated me before you.
[15:19] If you were of this world, the world would be a friend to its
own; but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of
the world, therefore the world hates you.  [15:20]Remember the word
which I said to you, a servant is not greater than his lord. If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my
word, they will also keep yours. [15:21]But all these things they will
do to you, on my account, because they know not him that sent me.
[15:22]If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had
sin; but now they have no pretext for their sin. [15:23]He that hates
me, hates my Father also. [15:24]If I had not done among them the works
which no other one has done, they would not have had sin; but now they
have both seen and hated both me and my Father.  [15:25]But [they do
this] that the word written in their law may be fulfilled, They hated
me without cause. [15:26]But when the Comforter has come, whom I will
send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the
Father, he shall testify of me; [15:27]and you shall also testify,
because you have been with me from the beginning.

3 [16:1]These things I have said to you, that you may not be offended.
[16:2] They shall put you out of the synagogues; but the hour is coming
when every one that kills you will think he renders God a service.
[16:3]And these things they will do, because they have not known the
Father nor me. [16:4]But these things I have told you, that when the
time comes you may remember that I told you of them. But I told you not
these things at the beginning, because I was with you. [16:5]But now I
go to him that sent me, and no one of you asks me, Where do you go?
[16:6]But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled
your hearts. [16:7]But I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you
that I should go away; for if I do not go away, the Comforter will not
come to you; but if I go I will send him to you.  [16:8]And when he has
come, he will convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment: [16:9]of sin, because they believe not on me; [16:10]and of
righteousness, because I go to my Father, and you behold me no more;
[16:11]and of judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.

4 [16:12]I have many things yet to say to you, but you cannot bear them
now; [16:13]but when he, the Spirit of truth has come, he will lead you
in all the truth; for he will not speak of himself, but he will speak
whatever he shall hear, and tell you things to come. [16:14]He shall
glorify me, because he shall receive from me and tell you. [16:15]All
things that the Father has, are mine; on this account I said, He shall
receive of me and tell you.

5 [16:16]A little while and you shall not see me; and again a little
while and you shall see me. [16:17]Then some of his disciples said one
to another, What is this that he says to us, A little while and you
shall not see me, and again a little while and you shall see me? and,
Because I go to the Father?  [16:18]They said therefore, What is this
that he says, The little while? We do not know what he says.

6 [16:19]Jesus knew that they wished to ask him, and said to them, Do
you inquire among yourselves concerning this that I said, A little
while and you shall not see me, and again a little while and you shall
see me? [16:20]I tell you most truly, that you shall weep and lament,
but the world shall rejoice; and you shall be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall become joy. [16:21]For when a woman is in labor she has
pain, because her time has come; but when she has borne the child she
no longer remembers the distress, because of joy that a man is born
into the world.  [16:22]And you therefore now indeed have sorrow; but I
will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no one
shall take from you. [16:23]And in that day you shall ask me nothing; I
tell you most truly, whatever you shall ask the Father, he will give
you in my name. [16:24] Till now you have asked nothing in my name; ask
and you shall receive, that your joy may be complete.

7 [16:25]These things have I spoken to you in parables. The time is
coming when I will no more speak to you in parables, but I will tell
you plainly of the Father. [16:26]In that day you shall ask in my name,
and I tell you not that I will ask the Father for you; [16:27]for the
Father himself is a friend to you, because you have been friends to me,
and believed that I came forth from God. [16:28]I came forth from the
Father and have come into the world; again I leave the world and go to
the Father.

8 [16:29]Then his disciples said to him, Behold, now you speak plainly,
and say no parable; [16:30]now we know that you know all things, and
have no need that any one should ask you; on this account we believe
that you have come forth from God.  [16:31]Jesus answered them, Do you
now believe? [16:32]Behold, the time is coming, and has come, that you
shall be scattered every one to his own, and leave me alone; and I am
not alone, for the Father is with me. [16:33]These things have I told
you, that in me you may have peace. In the world you shall have
affliction; but be of good courage, I have overcome the world.




