CHAPTER XVIII. CHRIST'S PRAYER FOR HIS DISCIPLES.


1 [17:1]JESUS spoke these words and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and
said, Father, the hour has come; glorify thy Son, that the Son may
glorify thee, [17:2]as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that
as to all that thou hast given him he should give them eternal life.
[17:3]And this is the eternal life; that they shall know thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. [17:4]I have glorified
thee on the earth; I have finished the work which thou gayest me to do.
[17:5]And now glorify thou me, Father, with thyself, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was.

2 [17:6]I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gayest me out
of the world; they were thine, and thou gavest them me, and they have
kept thy word. [17:7]Now they have known that all things which thou
hast given me are of thee, [17:8]because the words which thou hast
given me I have given them; and they have received and known truly that
I came forth from thee, and believed that thou didst send me. [17:9]I
pray for them. I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast
given me, for they are thine, [17:10]and all mine are thine, and thine
mine, and I am glorified in them. [17:11]And I am no longer in the
world, and these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father,
keep in thy name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one as
we also are. [17:12]When I was with them in the world, I kept them in
thy name which thou gayest me, and preserved [them], and no one of them
has been lost, except the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled; [17:13]but now I come to thee, and I say these things in the
world that they may have my joy made complete in them.

3 [17:14]I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them
because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world.  [17:15]I
ask not that thou wouldst take them out of the world, but that thou
wouldst keep them from evil. [17:16]They are not of the world, as I am
not of the world. [17:17]Sanctify them by thy truth; thy word is truth.
[17:18]As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into
the world: [17:19]and I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be
sanctified by truth.

4 [17:20]And I ask not for these only, but for those also who shall
believe on me through their word, [17:21]that all may be one, as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that
the world may believe that thou hast sent me. [17:22]And the glory
which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one as we
are one, [17:23]I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfected
into one, that the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved
them as thou hast loved me. [17:24]Father, what thou hast given me, I
will that they should be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou hast given me; because thou didst love me before the
foundation of the world; [17:25]and, righteous Father, the world has
not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou
didst send me. [17:26]And I have declared to them thy name, and will
declare it, that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them,
as I also am in them.




