CHAPTER XIX. THE APPREHENSION OF CHRIST, HIS EXAMINATION BY THE JEWS, PETER'S DENIAL OF HIM.


1 [18:1]JESUS having said these words went out with his disciples
across the brook Cedron, where there was a garden, into which he
entered and his disciples. [18:2]And Judas who betrayed him knew the
place, for Jesus often retired there with his disciples.  [18:3]Then
Judas taking the guard and the officers of the chief priests and
Pharisees, came there with torches, and lamps, and weapons.
[18:4]Jesus, therefore, knowing all things that were coming upon him,
went out and said to them, Whom do you seek?  [18:5]They answered him,
Jesus the Nazoraean. Jesus said to them, I am he. And Judas who
betrayed him stood with them. [18:6]When, therefore, he said to them, I
am he, they went backwards and fell on the ground. [18:7]Then he asked
them again, Whom do you seek?  And they said, Jesus, the Nazoraean.
[18:8]Jesus answered, I told you that I am he; if, therefore, you seek
me, let these go; [18:9]that the word might be fulfilled which he said,
Of those whom thou gayest me I have lost none. [18:10]Then Simon Peter
having a sword drew it and struck the servant of the chief priest, and
cut off his right ear; and the name of the servant was Malchus.
[18:11]Then Jesus said to Peter, Put the sword in the sheath. The cup
which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?

2 [18:12]Then the guard and the chiliarch and the officers of the Jews
apprehended Jesus, and bound him, [18:13]and led him away to Annas
first; for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was chief priest that
year; [18:14]and Caiaphas was the one who advised the Jews that it was
expedient that one man should be destroyed for the people.

3 [18:15]But Simon Peter followed Jesus, and the other disciple; and
that disciple was known to the chief priest, and went in with Jesus to
the chief priest's court; [18:16]but Peter stood at the door without.
Then the other disciple who was known to the chief priest went out and
spoke to the door-keeper, and brought in Peter. [18:17]Then the female
servant, the door-keeper, said to Peter, Are you also one of the
disciples of this man? He said, I am not. [18:18]And the servants and
officers having made a fire because it was cold, stood and warmed
themselves. And Peter stood with them and warmed himself.

4 [18:19]Then the chief priest asked Jesus of his disciples, and his
teaching. [18:20]Jesus answered him, I have spoken openly to the world;
I always taught in a synagogue, and in the temple, where the Jews
always assemble, and in secret I have said nothing. [18:21]Why do you
ask me? Ask those who have heard me, what I said to them; behold, they
know what I said. [18:22]He having said these things, one of the
officers who stood by gave Jesus a blow, saying, Do you answer the
chief priest thus?  [18:23]Jesus answered him, If I spoke wrong,
testify of the wrong; but if well, why do you beat me? [18:24]Then
Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the chief priest.

5 [18:25]And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Then they
said to him, Are you also one of his disciples? He denied, and said, I
am not. [18:26] One of the servants of the chief priest, being a
relation of him whose ear Peter cut off, said, Did I not see you in the
garden with him? [18:27]Then Peter denied again; and immediately a cock
crew.




