CHAPTER XX. CHRIST'S TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION BEFORE PILATE.


1 [18:28]THEN they led him from Caiaphas to the Praetorium. And it was
morning; and they entered not into the Praetorium, that they might not
be defiled, but might eat the passover.  [18:29]Then Pilate went out to
them and said, What accusation do you bring against this man?
[18:30]They answered and said to him, If he was not a criminal we
should not have delivered him up to you. [18:31] Then Pilate said to
them, Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law. The
Jews said to him, It is not lawful for us to put any one to death;
[18:32]that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying by what death he was about to die.

2 [18:33]Then Pilate went into the Praetorium and called Jesus, and
said to him, Are you the king of the Jews? [18:34]Jesus answered, Do
you say this of yourself, or did others tell you of me? [18:35]Pilate
answered, Am I a Jew? Your nation and the chief priests have delivered
you to me; what have you done?  [18:36]Jesus answered, My kingdom is
not of this world. If my kingdom had been of this world my officers
would have fought for me, that I should not be given up to the Jews;
but now my kingdom is not here. [18:37]Then Pilate said to him, Are you
a king then?  Jesus answered, As you say, I am a king. For this was I
born, and for this I came into the world, that I should testify to the
truth; every one who is of the truth hears my voice.  [18:38]Pilate
said to him, What is truth? And having said this he went out again to
the Jews, and said to them, I find no fault in him. [18:39]But you have
a custom that I should release one to you at the passover; are you
willing, therefore, that I should release to you the king of the Jews?
[18:40]Then all cried again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. But
Barabbas was a robber.

3 [19:1]Then Pilate took and scourged Jesus. [19:2]And the soldiers
having plaited a crown of thorns put it on his head; and they put a
purple garment about him, [19:3]and came to him and said, Hail, king of
the Jews! And they struck him with the open hand. [19:4]Then Pilate
came out again and said to them, Behold, I bring him out to you, that
you may know that I find no fault in him. [19:5]Then Jesus came out,
wearing the thorny crown and the purple garment. And he said to them,
Behold the man! [19:6]When therefore the chief priests and officers saw
him, they cried, saying, Crucify him! crucify him! Pilate said to them,
Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find no fault in him.
[19:7]The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to
die because he made himself the Son of God.

4 [19:8]When therefore Pilate heard this charge he was more afraid,
[19:9]and entered into the Praetorium again, and said to Jesus, Whence
are you? But Jesus gave him no answer.  [19:10]Pilate said to him, Do
you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have power to release you,
and I have power to crucify you? [19:11]Jesus answered, You would have
had no power against me if it had not been given you from above;
therefore he that delivered me to you has a greater sin.

5 [19:12]From that time Pilate sought to release him; but the Jews
cried, saying, If you release this man you are not a friend of Caesar;
every one who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar. [19:13]Then
Pilate hearing these words led Jesus out, and sat on the tribunal, in a
place called the Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabbatha. [19:14]And it was
the preparation of the passover, it was about the sixth hour [noon];
and he said to the Jews, Behold your king! [19:15]Then they cried out,
Away with him, away with him! crucify him! Pilate said to them, Shall I
crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but
Caesar. [19:16]Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified.




