CHAPTER XXI. CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION, DEATH, AND BURIAL.


1 [19:17]THEN they took Jesus, and putting the cross on him he went out
to what is called the place of a cranium, which in Hebrew is called
Golgotha, [19:18] where they crucified him, and two others with him,
one on one side and the other on the other, and Jesus between.
[19:19]And Pilate wrote an inscription and put on the cross. And it was
written, JESUS THE NAZORAEAN, THE KING OF THE JEWS. [19:20]Many of the
Jews therefore read this inscription, because the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh the city; and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and
Greek.  [19:21]Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Write
not, The King of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews.
[19:22]Pilate answered, what I have written I have written.

2 [19:23]Then the soldiers, when they crucified Jesus, took his clothes
and made four parts, a part to each soldier, and his coat. But his coat
was without seam, woven from the top through the whole. [19:24]They
said, therefore, one to another, Let us not divide this, but cast lots
for it whose it shall be; that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which
says, They parted my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast
lots. The soldiers therefore did indeed these things.

3 [19:25]And there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and the
sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary the Magdalene.
[19:26]Then Jesus seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by whom
he loved, said to his mother, Woman, behold your son. [19:27]Then he
said to the disciple, Behold your mother. And from that hour the
disciple took her to his own [house].

4 [19:28]After this, Jesus knowing that all things were already
finished, that the Scripture might be fully accomplished, said, I
thirst. [19:29]Then a vessel was set full of vinegar; and filling a
sponge with vinegar, and putting it on a hyssop stalk, they presented
it to his mouth. [19:30]When therefore Jesus took the vinegar, he said,
It is finished; and inclining his head gave up the spirit.

5 [19:31]Then the Jews, that the bodies might not continue on the cross
on the sabbath, for it was the preparation, for that was a great
sabbath, asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and they be taken
down. [19:32]Then the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and
of the other crucified with him, [19:33]and coming to Jesus, when they
saw him already dead, they broke not his legs; [19:34]but one of the
soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and immediately there came out
blood and water. [19:35]He who saw has testified, and his testimony is
true, for he knows that he says what is true, that you also may
believe. [19:36]For these things were done that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be broken; [19:37]and again another
Scripture says, They shall look on him whom they have pierced.

6 [19:38]After these things Joseph from Arimathea, being a disciple of
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate that he might
take down the body of Jesus; and Pilate permitted him. Then he came and
took his body. [19:39]And Nicodemus, who at first came to Jesus by
night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred
pounds.  [19:40]Then they took the body of Jesus, and bound it with
bandages, with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to prepare for
burial. [19:41]And there was in the place where he was crucified a
garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one was yet laid.
[19:42]In that therefore they laid Jesus, on account of the preparation
of the Jews, because the tomb was near.




