CHAPTER XXII. CHRIST AFTER THE RESURRECTION.


1 [20:1]AND on the first day of the week, Mary the Magdalene came in
the morning, while it was yet dark, to the tomb and saw the stone taken
away from the tomb. [20:2]Then she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to
the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, They have taken
away the Lord from the tomb, and we know not where they have laid him.
[20:3]Then went Peter and the other disciple, and came to the tomb.
[20:4]And the two ran together; and the other disciple outran Peter and
came first to the tomb, [20:5]and stooping down saw the bandages lying,
but he went not in. [20:6]Then Simon Peter came following him, and went
into the tomb, and beheld the bandages lying, [20:7]and the napkin
which was on his head not lying with the bandages but folded up in a
place by itself. [20:8]Then the other disciple who came first to the
tomb also entered in, and saw and believed; [20:9]for they did not yet
know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead.  [20:10]Then the
disciples went away by themselves.

2 [20:11]But Mary stood at the tomb outside, weeping. Then as she wept
she stooped down to the tomb, [20:12]and saw two angels in white
sitting one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain. [20:13]And they said to her, Woman, why do you weep?
She said to them, Because they have taken my Lord and I know not where
they have laid him. [20:14]Having said these words she turned around
and beheld Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. [20:15]Jesus
said to her, Woman, why do you weep? whom do you seek? She, supposing
that he was the gardener, said to him, Sir, if you have borne him away,
tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him. [20:16]Jesus said
to her, Mary. She, turning around, said to him in Hebrew, Rabboni,
which is interpreted, Teacher. [20:17]Jesus said to her, Do not touch
me; for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to my brothers
and tell them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and my God and
your God. [20:18]Mary the Magdalene came and told the disciples that
she had seen the Lord, and that he said these things to her.

3 [20:19]Then when it was evening, on that first day of the week, and
the doors were shut where the disciples were for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, Peace be to you.
[20:20]And having said this he showed them both his hands and his side;
then the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. [20:21]Then he said
to them again, Peace be to you; as the Father has sent me, I also send
you. [20:22]And having said this he breathed on them, and said to them,
Receive the Holy Spirit.  [20:23]Those whose sins you forgive, are
forgiven; and whose you retain, are retained.

4 [20:24]But Thomas, one of the twelve, called the Twin, was not with
them when Jesus came. [20:25]Then the other disciples said to him, We
have seen the Lord; but he said to them, Unless I see in his hands the
impression of the nails, and put my finger in the impression of the
nails, and put my hand in his side, I will not believe. [20:26]And
after eight days his disciples were again within, and Thomas with them.
Jesus came, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be to you. [20:27]Then he said to Thomas, Reach here your finger
and behold my hands, and reach your hand and put it in my side, and be
not faithless but believing. [20:28]Thomas answered and said to him, My
Lord and my God. [20:29]Jesus said to him, Because you have seen me you
have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and believed.

5 [20:30]Jesus performed also many other miracles in the presence of
his disciples which are not recorded in this book; [20:31]but these are
recorded that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and that believing you may have life in his name.

6 [21:1]After these things he showed himself again to the disciples at
the lake of Tiberias; and he showed himself thus.  [21:2]Simon Peter,
and Thomas called the Twin, and Nathaniel who was from Cana in Galilee,
and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together.
[21:3]Simon Peter said to them, I am going a fishing. They said to him,
We will also go with you.  They went out and entered into the ship; and
on that night caught nothing, [21:4]but when it was now morning Jesus
stood on the shore; but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
[21:5]Then Jesus said to them, Children, have you any thing to eat?
They answered him, No. [21:6]And he said to them, Cast the net on the
right side of the ship and you shall find. Then they cast it, and they
were not able to draw it from the number of fishes.  [21:7]Then that
disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, It is the Lord. Then Simon
Peter, hearing that it was the Lord, girded on his coat, for he was
naked, and cast himself into the lake.  [21:8]But the other disciples
came with the boat, drawing the net of fishes, for they were not far
from the land, but about two hundred cubits distant. [21:9]Then when
they came to land they saw coals placed, and a fish laid upon [them],
and bread. [21:10] Jesus said to them, Bring of the fish that you have
now caught.  [21:11]Simon Peter went and drew the net to the land, full
of great fishes a hundred and fifty-three; and though there were so
many the net was not broken. [21:12]Jesus said to them, Come and
breakfast. No one of the disciples dared to ask him, Who are you?  for
they knew that he was the Lord. [21:13]Jesus came and took the bread
and gave them, and the fish likewise. [21:14]This was now the third
time that Jesus appeared to his disciples after he had arisen from the
dead.

7 [21:15]When therefore they had breakfasted, Jesus said to Simon
Peter, Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these? He said to
him, Yes, Lord, you know that I am a friend to you. He said to him,
Feed my lambs. [21:16]Again he said to him a second time; Simon, son of
John, do you love me? He said to him, Yes, Lord, you know that I am a
friend to you. He said to him, Feed my sheep. [21:17] He said to him a
third time; Simon, son of John, are you a friend to me? Peter was
grieved that he said to him the third time, Are you a friend to me? and
he said to him, Lord you know all things; you know that I am a friend
to you. Jesus said to him, Feed my sheep. [21:18]I tell you most truly,
that when you were young you girded yourself and walked where you
would; but when you become old, you shall stretch out your hands and
another shall bind you and carry you where you would not; [21:19]but he
said this signifying by what death he should glorify God; and having
said this, he said to him, Follow me.

8 [21:20]And Peter turning around saw the disciple whom Jesus loved
following, who also reclined at the supper on his breast and said,
Lord, who is it that is to betray you? [21:21]Peter seeing him said to
Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man [do]?  [21:22]Jesus said to him,
If I wish him to continue till I come, what is that to you? follow me.
[21:23]The report then went out among the brothers that this disciple
would not die; but Jesus said not to him, He shall not die; but, If I
wish him to continue till I come, what is that to you?

9 [21:24]This is the disciple who testifies of these things and has
written them; and we know that his testimony is true.  [21:25]And there
are many other things which Jesus did, which, if they should be written
particularly, I do not suppose the world itself could contain the books
written.





