ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. CHAPTER I. CHRIST'S ASCENSION, AND THE ELECTION OF AN APOSTLE IN THE PLACE OF JUDAS.


1 [1:1]I WROTE my first account, O Theophilus, of all things which
Jesus did and taught, [1:2]till the day that having given charge to the
apostles whom he chose by the Holy Spirit he was taken up; [1:3]to whom
also he presented himself living after his suffering, by many proofs,
being seen by them during forty days, and speaking things relating to
the kingdom of God. [1:4]And assembling them, he charged them not to
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which
[says he] you have heard from me; [1:5]that John baptized indeed with
water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit after a few days.

2 [1:6]They therefore having come together asked him, saying, Lord,
will you at this time restore the kingdom of Israel?  [1:7]And he said
to them, It is not your [province] to know the times or seasons which
the Father has appointed by his own authority; [1:8]but you shall
receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and shall be my
witnesses both in Jerusalem, and all Judea, and Samaria, and to the end
of the earth. [1:9]And having said these words, as they were looking on
he was taken up, and a cloud received him from their sight. [1:10]And
as they looked steadily to heaven while he went, behold, two men stood
by them in white clothing; [1:11]and they said, Men of Galilee, why do
you stand looking at heaven? This Jesus taken up from you to heaven
shall so come in the manner in which you have seen him go to heaven.

3 [1:12]Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called [the
Mount] of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey
[distant]. [1:13]And when they came, they went up into the upper room
where staid Peter and John, and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas,
Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus and Simon the Zealot,
and Judas the [brother] of James.  [1:14]All these continued with one
accord in prayer, with the women, and with Mary the mother of Jesus,
and his brothers.

4 [1:15]And in those days Peter standing up in the midst of the
brothers, said--the multitude together was about a hundred and twenty--
[1:16]Men and brothers, it was necessary that the Scripture should be
fulfilled which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David,
concerning Judas who became a guide to them that apprehended Jesus;
[1:17]For he was numbered with us, and obtained the inheritance of this
service. [1:18]This man therefore purchased a field with the price of
the wickedness, and falling headlong burst in the middle and all his
bowels were poured out; [1:19]and this became known to all who lived at
Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their language Aceldamach,
which is Field of blood. [1:20]For it is written in the book of Psalms,
Let his dwelling be desolate and let no one dwell in it, and his
superintendency let another take. [1:21]It is necessary therefore that
one of the men who have gone with us all the time in which the Lord
Jesus went in and out among us, [1:22]beginning from the baptism of
John till the day on which he was taken up from us, should be made with
us a witness of his resurrection.

5 [1:23]And they proposed two; Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also
called Justus, and Matthias. [1:24]And praying, they said, Do thou,
Lord, the searcher of all hearts, show which of these two thou hast
chosen [1:25]to take the place of this service and apostleship from
which Judas fell by transgression to go to his place. [1:26]And they
cast their lots, and the lot fell to Matthias, and he was numbered with
the eleven apostles.




