ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. CHAPTER I. CHRIST'S ASCENSION, AND THE ELECTION OF AN APOSTLE IN THE PLACE OF JUDAS.


1 [1:1]I WROTE my first account, O Theophilus, of all things which
Jesus did and taught, [1:2]till the day that having given charge to the
apostles whom he chose by the Holy Spirit he was taken up; [1:3]to whom
also he presented himself living after his suffering, by many proofs,
being seen by them during forty days, and speaking things relating to
the kingdom of God. [1:4]And assembling them, he charged them not to
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which
[says he] you have heard from me; [1:5]that John baptized indeed with
water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit after a few days.

2 [1:6]They therefore having come together asked him, saying, Lord,
will you at this time restore the kingdom of Israel?  [1:7]And he said
to them, It is not your [province] to know the times or seasons which
the Father has appointed by his own authority; [1:8]but you shall
receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and shall be my
witnesses both in Jerusalem, and all Judea, and Samaria, and to the end
of the earth. [1:9]And having said these words, as they were looking on
he was taken up, and a cloud received him from their sight. [1:10]And
as they looked steadily to heaven while he went, behold, two men stood
by them in white clothing; [1:11]and they said, Men of Galilee, why do
you stand looking at heaven? This Jesus taken up from you to heaven
shall so come in the manner in which you have seen him go to heaven.

3 [1:12]Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called [the
Mount] of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey
[distant]. [1:13]And when they came, they went up into the upper room
where staid Peter and John, and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas,
Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus and Simon the Zealot,
and Judas the [brother] of James.  [1:14]All these continued with one
accord in prayer, with the women, and with Mary the mother of Jesus,
and his brothers.

4 [1:15]And in those days Peter standing up in the midst of the
brothers, said--the multitude together was about a hundred and twenty--
[1:16]Men and brothers, it was necessary that the Scripture should be
fulfilled which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David,
concerning Judas who became a guide to them that apprehended Jesus;
[1:17]For he was numbered with us, and obtained the inheritance of this
service. [1:18]This man therefore purchased a field with the price of
the wickedness, and falling headlong burst in the middle and all his
bowels were poured out; [1:19]and this became known to all who lived at
Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their language Aceldamach,
which is Field of blood. [1:20]For it is written in the book of Psalms,
Let his dwelling be desolate and let no one dwell in it, and his
superintendency let another take. [1:21]It is necessary therefore that
one of the men who have gone with us all the time in which the Lord
Jesus went in and out among us, [1:22]beginning from the baptism of
John till the day on which he was taken up from us, should be made with
us a witness of his resurrection.

5 [1:23]And they proposed two; Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also
called Justus, and Matthias. [1:24]And praying, they said, Do thou,
Lord, the searcher of all hearts, show which of these two thou hast
chosen [1:25]to take the place of this service and apostleship from
which Judas fell by transgression to go to his place. [1:26]And they
cast their lots, and the lot fell to Matthias, and he was numbered with
the eleven apostles.




CHAPTER II. THE DAY OF PENTECOST AND ITS BLESSINGS.


1 [2:1]AND when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one
mind together. [2:2]And suddenly there came from heaven a sound as of a
violent wind borne along, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting; [2:3]and there appeared to them divided tongues as of fire,
and [one] sat on each one of them; [2:4]and they were all filled with
the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with tongues as the Spirit gave
them utterance.

2 [2:5]And there were Jews living at Jerusalem, pious men, of every
nation under heaven; [2:6]and when this sound was [heard], the
multitude came together and were astonished, for they each one heard
them speaking in his own language. [2:7]And they were astonished and
wondered, saying, Are not all these that speak Galileans? [2:8]And how
do we hear each one in our own language in which we were born,
[2:9]Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and those who live in
Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, [2:10]Phrygia and
Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and the Roman
strangers, both Jews and proselytes, [2:11]Cretes and Arabs, do we hear
them speak in our tongues of the great works of God. [2:12]And they
were all astonished and perplexed, saying one to another, What does
this mean? [2:13]But others mocking said, They are full of sweet wine.

3 [2:14]But Peter standing up with the eleven lifted up his voice and
said to them, Men of Judea, and all who live at Jerusalem, be this
known to you, and attend to my words. [2:15]For these are not drunk as
you suppose, for it is the third hour of the day [9 A.M.], [2:16]but
this is what was said by the prophet; [2:17]In the last days, says God,
I will pour out of my Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams; [2:18]and upon my male servants and
upon my female servants in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and
they shall prophesy.  [2:19]And I will show prodigies in heaven above
and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and a cloud of smoke.
[2:20]The sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood,
before the great and illustrious day of the Lord comes. [2:21]And
whoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

4 [2:22]Men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus the Nazoraean, a man
approved by God to you by mighty works and prodigies and miracles,
which God performed by him in the midst of you, as you yourselves know,
[2:23]this man, delivered up by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, you have affixed to the cross, and killed by the
hand of the wicked, [2:24]him has God raised up, having loosed the
pains of death, as it was not possible that he should be held by it.
[2:25]For David says of him, I saw the Lord always before me, he is on
my right hand that I should not be moved; [2:26]therefore my heart
rejoiced and my tongue was glad, and my flesh, moreover, shall also
live in hope; [2:27]for thou wilt not leave my soul in hades, nor
suffer thy Holy One to see destruction. [2:28]Thou hast made me know
the ways of life, thou wilt fill me with joy with thy presence.

5 [2:29]Men and brothers, let me speak to you freely of the patriarch
David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to
this day. [2:30] Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God swore
with an oath to him to set a descendant of his on his throne,
[2:31]foreseeing he spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that he was
not left in hades neither did his flesh see destruction. [2:32]This
Jesus has God raised up, whose witnesses we all are. [2:33]Being
therefore exalted on the right hand of God, and receiving the promise
of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he has poured this out which you
both see and hear.  [2:34]For David ascended not to heaven, but he
says, The Lord said to my lord, Sit on my right hand [2:35]till I make
your enemies your footstool. [2:36]Let all the house of Israel
therefore know certainly, that God has made this Jesus whom you
crucified both Lord and Christ.

6 [2:37]And hearing [this] they were distressed in mind, and said to
Peter and the rest of the apostles, Men and brothers, what shall we do?
[2:38]And Peter said to them, Change your minds, and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and
you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. [2:39]For the promise is
to you and your children, and to all that are afar off, as many as the
Lord our God shall call.  [2:40]And with many other words he testified
and exhorted, saying, Save yourselves from this perverse generation.

7 [2:41]Then those that received his word were baptized, and there were
added on that day about three thousand souls; [2:42]and they attended
constantly to the teaching and companionship of the apostles, the
breaking of bread and the prayers. [2:43]And fear was on every soul,
and many prodigies and miracles were performed by the apostles.
[2:44]And all who believed were together and had all things common;
[2:45]and they sold their possessions and estates, and distributed them
to all as any one had need; [2:46]and continuing day by day with one
accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, they
partook of food with gladness and simplicity of mind, [2:47]praising
God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added the
saved, day by day, to the assembly [church].




CHAPTER III. THE IMPRISONMENT OF PETER AND JOHN.


1 [3:1]AND Peter and John went up together to the temple at the hour of
prayer, which is the ninth hour. [3:2]And a certain man lame from his
birth was carried and placed daily at the gate of the temple which is
called Beautiful, to ask charity of those going into the temple;
[3:3]who seeing Peter and John about to enter into the temple, asked to
receive a charity. [3:4]But Peter looking steadily at him with John,
said, Look on us. [3:5]And he gave his attention to them, expecting to
receive something from them. [3:6]But Peter said, Silver and gold have
I none; but what I have, this I give you; in the name of Jesus Christ
the Nazoraean, walk. [3:7]And taking him by the right hand he raised
him up; and immediately his feet and ankles were strengthened, [3:8]and
leaping up he stood and walked and entered with them into the temple,
walking and leaping, praising God. [3:9]And all the people saw him
walking and praising God; [3:10] and they knew him, that he was the one
who sat for charity at the beautiful gate of the temple, and they were
filled with wonder and astonishment at what had happened to him.

2 [3:11]And as he held Peter and John, all the people ran to them in
the porch which is called Solomon's, greatly wondering.  [3:12]And
Peter seeing it answered the people, Men of Israel, why do you wonder
at this? or why do you look intently at us as if by our power or piety
we had made him walk? [3:13]The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
the God of our fathers, glorified his servant Jesus, whom you delivered
up and denied before Pilate when he decided to release him; [3:14]but
you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked a murderer to be given
you, [3:15]but killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the
dead, whose witnesses we are. [3:16]And by the faith of his name, his
name has made strong this man whom you behold and know, and the faith
which is by him has given him this entire soundness before you all.
[3:17]And now, brothers, I know that you did it without knowledge, as
did also your rulers; [3:18]but what God had before declared by the
mouth of all the prophets that his Anointed should suffer, he has so
accomplished. [3:19]Change your minds, therefore, and turn yourselves,
that your sins may be blotted out, that times of refreshing may come
from the presence of the Lord, [3:20]and he send to you Jesus Christ
before appointed, [3:21]whom heaven must receive till the times of the
restoration of all things of which God has spoken by the mouth of his
holy prophets since the world began. [3:22]Moses indeed said, A prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up to you, of your brothers, like me; him
shall you hear in all things which he shall speak to you; [3:23]and
every soul which will not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from the
people. [3:24]And all the prophets, from Samuel and those following him
in order, who have spoken, have also announced these days. [3:25]You
are the children of the prophets, and of the promise which God promised
to our fathers, saying to Abraham, And in your offspring shall all the
families of the earth be blessed. [3:26]God having raised up his
servant has sent him to you first, to bless you by turning each [one of
you] from your evil ways.

3 [4:1]And while they were speaking to the people, the priests, and the
commander of the temple, and the Sadducees came upon them, [4:2]being
displeased because they taught the people and declared by Jesus the
resurrection of the dead; [4:3]and they laid hands on them and put them
in prison till the next day; for it was now evening. [4:4]But many of
those that heard the word believed, and the number of the men became
about five thousand.

4 [4:5]And on the next day the rulers, and elders, and scribes
[4:6]assembled at Jerusalem, and Annas the chief priest, and Caiaphas,
and John, and Alexander, and all that were of the family of the chief
priesthood, [4:7]and placing them in the midst, asked, By what power,
or by what name, have you done this?  [4:8] Then Peter, full of the
Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people and elders of Israel,
[4:9]if we are to-day examined concerning the good work done to the
sick man, by what means he has been cured, [4:10]be it known to you
all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ
the Nazoraean, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, by
him has this man stood before you sound. [4:11]This is the stone
rejected by you builders, which has become the head of a corner.
[4:12]And there is salvation in no other; for there is no other name
given under heaven among men, by which we can be saved.

5 [4:13]And seeing the boldness of Peter and John, and supposing that
they were illiterate and common men, they wondered, and perceived that
they had been with Jesus; [4:14]and seeing the man standing with them
cured, they could not dispute it. [4:15]And commanding them to withdraw
from the Sanhedrim, they conferred one with another, [4:16]saying, What
shall we do to these men?  for that a notable miracle has been
performed by them is manifest to all that live at Jerusalem, and we
cannot deny it; [4:17]but that it spread no further among the people,
let us threaten them severely, [and charge them] to speak no more to
any man in this name. [4:18]And calling them, they charged them not to
speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. [4:19]But Peter and John
answered and said to them, Whether it is right in the sight of God to
obey you rather than God, judge; [4:20]for we cannot but tell what we
have seen and heard. [4:21]And threatening them still further, they
dismissed them, not being able to punish them, on account of the
people, because all glorified God for what was done; [4:22]for the man
was more than forty years old on whom this miracle of the cure was
performed.

6 [4:23]And being dismissed they came to their friends, and related to
them what the chief priests and elders said to them.  [4:24]And when
they heard it they lifted up their voice with one consent to God, and
said, Master, thou who hast made heaven, and the earth, the sea, and
all things in them, [4:25]who by the mouth of thy servant David hast
said, Why did the nations rage and the peoples devise vain things?
[4:26]the kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were assembled
together against the Lord, and against his anointed. [4:27]For of a
truth, in this city, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the gentiles
and people of Israel, were assembled together against thy holy servant
Jesus whom thou hast anointed, [4:28]to do what thy hand and counsel
before appointed to be done. [4:29]And now, Lord, look down upon their
threatenings, and grant to thy servants with all boldness to speak thy
word, [4:30]by stretching out thy hand, that cures and miracles and
prodigies may be performed by the name of thy holy servant Jesus.
[4:31]And when they had prayed the place was shaken in which they were
assembled, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and spoke the
word of God with boldness.




CHAPTER IV. THE LIBERALITY OF THE FIRST CHRISTIANS, ANANIAS AND SAPPHIRA, FURTHER PERSECUTION.


1 [4:32]AND the multitude that believed had one heart and one soul, and
none said that anything of his possessions was his; but they had all
things common. [4:33]And the apostles delivered the testimony of the
resurrection of the Lord Jesus with great power, and great favor was
towards them all. [4:34]For no one among them was needy; for those who
possessed lands or houses sold and brought the prices of the things
sold, [4:35]and laid them at the apostles' feet; and distribution was
made to each as any one had need. [4:36]And Joseph, called Barnabas by
the apostles, which is interpreted, A son of consolation, a Levite, a
Cyprian by birth, [4:37]having land, sold it, and brought the money and
laid it at the feet of the apostles.

2 [5:1]And one Ananias by name, with Sapphira his wife, sold a
possession, [5:2]and he kept back a part of the price, his wife also
being privy to it, and bringing a certain part laid it at the apostles'
feet. [5:3]But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart
that you should lie to the Holy Spirit, and that you should keep back a
part of the price of the land?  [5:4]Continuing unsold was it not
yours, and when it was sold was it not at your disposal? Why did you
propose this thing in your heart? You have not lied to men but to God.
[5:5]And Ananias hearing these words fell down and expired; and great
fear was upon all who heard. [5:6]And the young men arose and laid him
out, and having carried him out buried him.

3 [5:7]And after an interval of about three hours, his wife, not
knowing what had happened, came in. [5:8]And Peter answered her, Tell
me whether you sold the field for so much? And she said, Yes; for so
much. [5:9]And Peter said to her, Why have you agreed together to try
the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those that buried your
husband are at the door, and they shall carry you out. [5:10]And she
fell down immediately at his feet, and expired; and the young men
coming in found her dead, and carried her out, and buried her by her
husband. [5:11]And great fear was on all the assembly [church], and on
all that heard of these things.

4 [5:12]And many miracles and prodigies were performed among the people
by the hands of the apostles; and they were all of one accord in
Solomon's porch; [5:13]and no one of the rest dared to join them, but
the people magnified them; [5:14]and believers were added the more to
the Lord, multitudes both of men and women; [5:15]so that they brought
the sick into the streets and placed them on little beds and couches,
that as Peter passed along even his shadow might overshadow some of
them. [5:16]And the multitude came together from the cities about
Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those troubled by impure spirits, all
of whom were cured.

5 [5:17]And the chief priest arose, and all those with him, being the
sect of the Sadducees, and were filled with wrath, [5:18]and laid hands
on the apostles, and put them in the public prison.  [5:19]But an angel
of the Lord opening the prison doors by night led them out and said,
[5:20]Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of
this life. [5:21]And hearing this they entered into the temple early in
the morning and taught. And the chief priest coming, and those with
him, called the Sanhedrim together, and all the eldership of the
children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.

6 [5:22]But the officers going did not find them in the prison; and
returning they reported, [5:23]saying, The prison found we shut with
all safety, and the guards standing before the doors, but opening we
found no one within. [5:24]And when they heard these words, both the
priest and the commander of the temple and the chief priests doubted
concerning them, what this could mean.  [5:25]But some one came and
told them, Behold, the men whom you put in prison are standing in the
temple, and teaching the people.

7 [5:26]Then the commander going away with the officers brought them
without violence, for they feared the people, lest they should be
stoned; [5:27]and having brought them they placed them before the
Sanhedrim. And the chief priest asked them, [5:28]saying, We charged
you strictly not to teach in this name, and behold, you have filled
Jerusalem with your teaching, and wish to bring this man's blood on us.
[5:29]And Peter answering, and the apostles, said, It is necessary to
obey God rather than man. [5:30]The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom you took and hung on a cross; [5:31]him has God exalted, a Prince
and Saviour at his right hand, to give a change of mind to Israel and
the forgiveness of sins. [5:32]And we are his witnesses of these
things, and also the Holy Spirit which God has given to those that obey
him.

8 [5:33]And when they heard this they were highly offended, and took
counsel to kill them. [5:34]But a certain Pharisee in the Sanhedrim, by
the name of Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, in honor with all the
people, standing up requested them to put the men out a little while;
[5:35]and he said to them, Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what
you are about to do to these men.  [5:36]For before these days Theudas
arose, saying that he was somebody, to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, adhered, who was destroyed, and all who obeyed him passed away
and came to nothing.

9 [5:37]After him arose Judas the Galilean, in the days of the census,
and drew away people after him; and he was destroyed, and all who
obeyed him were dispersed. [5:38]And now I tell you, abstain from these
men, and let them alone; because if this design, or this work, is from
men, it will be destroyed; [5:39]but if it is from God, you cannot
destroy them; lest you be found at some time to be fighting against
God. [5:40]And they were persuaded by him, and calling the apostles and
scourging them, they charged them not to speak in the name of Jesus,
and dismissed them. [5:41]They went therefore from the presence of the
Sanhedrim, rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame
for the name of [Christ]; [5:42]and every day in the temple, and from
house to house, they ceased not teaching and preaching the good news of
Christ Jesus.




CHAPTER V. THE APPOINTMENT OF SEVEN DEACONS, THE SERMON AND MARTYRDOM OF STEPHEN, AND A GENERAL PERSECUTION.


1 [6:1]AND in those days the disciples being multiplied, there was a
complaint of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, that their widows were
neglected in the daily service. [6:2]And the twelve calling the
multitude of the disciples, said, It is not desirable that we should
leave the word of God to serve tables. [6:3]Look out therefore,
brothers, from among you seven men of good repute, full of the Holy
Spirit, and of wisdom, whom we may set over this business; [6:4]but we
will attend continually to prayer, and the ministry of the word.

2 [6:5]And the proposition pleased all the multitude, and they elected
Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip and
Prochorus, and Nicanor and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus a
proselyte of Antioch, [6:6]and set them before the Apostles; and they
having prayed imposed hands on them. [6:7]And the word of God
increased, and the number of the disciples was greatly multiplied at
Jerusalem, and a great multitude of the priests obeyed the faith.

3 [6:8]And Stephen, full of grace and power, performed prodigies and
great miracles among the people. [6:9]But some members of the synagogue
called that of the Libertines and Cyrenians and Alexandrians and of
those from Cilicia and Asia, arose and disputed with Stephen, [6:10]and
were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit with which he spoke.
[6:11]Then they bribed men who said, We heard him speak blasphemous
words against Moses and God. [6:12]And they stirred up both the people,
and the elders, and the scribes, and coming suddenly they seized him
and led him to the Sanhedrim, [6:13]and brought forward false witnesses
who said, This man speaks incessantly against this holy place, and the
law; [6:14]for we have heard him say, that Jesus this Nazoraean will
destroy this place and change the customs which Moses gave us.
[6:15]And all who sat in the Sanhedrin looking steadily at him saw his
face like the face of an angel.

4 [7:1]And the chief priest said, Are these things then so?  [7:2]And
he said, Men, brothers, and fathers, hear. The God of glory appeared to
our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in
Haran, [7:3]and said to him, Go out from your country and your kindred,
and come to a land which I will show you. [7:4]Then going out from the
land of the Chaldeans, he lived in Haran. And thence, after the death
of his father, he removed into this land in which you now live.
[7:5]And [God] gave him no inheritance in it, not the breadth of a
foot, and promised to give it to him for a possession, and to his
posterity after him, when as yet he had no son. [7:6]And God said thus;
that his posterity should be a stranger in a foreign land, and they
shall enslave it and treat it injuriously four hundred years; [7:7]and
the nation which they shall serve will I judge, said God, and after
that they shall come forth and serve me in this place.

5 [7:8]And he gave him the ordinance of circumcision; and so he begat
Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac, Jacob, and
Jacob the twelve patriarchs. [7:9]And the patriarchs envying Joseph
sold him into Egypt; and God was with him [7:10]and delivered him from
all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and [he] made him governor over Egypt and all
his house.

6 [7:11]And there came a famine on all the land of Egypt and Canaan,
and great affliction, and our fathers found no provisions. [7:12]But
Jacob hearing that there was grain in Egypt, sent our fathers the first
time; [7:13]and the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers,
and Joseph's family was made known to Pharaoh. [7:14]And Joseph sent
and called for his father Jacob, and all the family of seventy-five
souls. [7:15]And Jacob went down to Egypt, and died, he and our
fathers; [7:16]and they carried him back to Shechem and buried him in
the tomb which Abraham bought for money of the sons of Hamor the father
of Shechem.

7 [7:17]But when the time of the promise which God made with an oath to
Abraham was at hand, the people increased and became numerous in Egypt,
[7:18]till another king arose who knew not Joseph. [7:19]This [king]
dealt deceitfully with our race, and treated injuriously our fathers,
causing their infants to be exposed that they might not be preserved
alive.

8 [7:20]At that time Moses was born, and was beautiful in the sight of
God, and was nourished three months in his father's house; [7:21]but
being exposed, the daughter of Pharaoh took him up and nourished him as
her own son. [7:22]And Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in his words and works. [7:23]And when he was
forty years old, it came into his mind to visit his brothers, the
children of Israel. [7:24]And seeing one injured he defended him, and
executed judgment for the oppressed, smiting the Egyptian. [7:25]And he
thought his brothers would understand that God would give them
salvation by his hand; but they understood not.

9 [7:26]On the following day also he showed himself to them as they
contended, and urged them to peace, saying, Men, you are brothers; why
do you injure one another? [7:27]But he that injured his neighbor
repelled him, saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?
[7:28]Will you kill me as you did the Egyptian, yesterday? [7:29]And
Moses fled at that saying, and lived a stranger in the land of Midian,
where he begat two sons.

10 [7:30]And forty years being completed there appeared to him in the
wilderness of Mount Sinai, an angel in a flame of fire, in a bush.
[7:31]And Moses seeing it, wondered at the sight; and coming near to
look at it, there was a voice of the Lord, [7:32]I am the God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. And Moses being
afraid dared not look at it. [7:33]And the Lord said to him, Put off
your shoes from your feet; for the place on which you stand is holy
ground. [7:34]I have seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and
have heard their groaning, and have come down to deliver them; and now
come, I will send you to Egypt.

11 [7:35]This is the Moses whom they denied, saying, Who made you a
ruler and a judge? Him did God send to be a ruler and a redeemer by the
hand of the angel that appeared to him in the bush. [7:36]This man
brought them out, having performed prodigies and miracles in Egypt, and
at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years. [7:37]This is the
Moses who said to the children of Israel, A prophet shall God raise up
for you, of your brothers, like me. [7:38] This is he that was with the
assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount
Sinai, and with our fathers, who received the living oracles to give
us, [7:39]whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him away and
turned back in their hearts to Egypt, [7:40]saying to Aaron, Make us
gods to go before us; for this Moses who led us up out of Egypt, we
know not what has happened to him.

12 [7:41]And they made a calf in those days, and offered a sacrifice to
the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.  [7:42]And God
turned and gave them up to serve the host of heaven, as it is written
in the book of the prophets; Did you offer victims and sacrifices to me
forty years in the wilderness, house of Israel, [7:43]and take up the
tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of the god Rephan, figures which you
made to worship? I will even remove you beyond Babylon.

13 [7:44]Our fathers in the wilderness received the tabernacle of the
testimony, as he that spoke to Moses charged him to make it according
to the pattern which he had seen; [7:45]which also our fathers
receiving it in succession brought with Joshua into the possession of
the nations, whom God expelled before the face of our fathers till the
days of David; [7:46]who found favor with God and desired to find a
dwelling for the God of Jacob.  [7:47]And Solomon built him a house.
[7:48]But the Most High dwells not in [temples] made with hands, as the
prophet says; [7:49]Heaven is my throne, and the earth my footstool;
what house will you build me, says the Lord, or what is the place of my
rest? [7:50]has not my hand made all these things? [7:51]Stiff necked,
and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always fight against the Holy
Spirit; as your fathers did, you also do.  [7:52]Which of the prophets
did not your fathers persecute? And they killed those who foretold the
coming of the Righteous One, of whom you now have become betrayers and
murderers, [7:53]who have received the law by orders of angels and have
not kept it.

14 [7:54]And when they heard these things they were enraged in their
minds and gnashed their teeth upon him. [7:55]But he being full of the
Holy Spirit, looking steadily to heaven saw the glory of God and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God, [7:56]and said, Behold, I see the
heavens opened and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.
[7:57]And crying with a loud voice they stopped their ears and rushed
upon him with one accord, [7:58]and casting him out of the city, stoned
him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at the feet of a young
man called Saul, [7:59]and they stoned Stephen, calling and saying,
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. [7:60]And kneeling down he cried with a
loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And having said
this he fell asleep. [8:1]And Saul consented to his death.

15 And at that time there was a great persecution of the church at
Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad through the regions of
Judea and Samaria, except the apostles. [8:2]And pious men buried
Stephen and made a great lamentation for him. [8:3]But Saul persecuted
the church, and going from house to house, seizing men and women,
committed them to prison.




CHAPTER VI. THE EARLY MINISTRY OF PHILIP THE DEACON, THE CONVERSION OF THE SAMARITANS, THE ETHIOPIAN EUNUCH.


1 [8:4]Being scattered abroad, therefore, they went everywhere
preaching the good news of the word; [8:5]and Philip going down to a
city of Samaria preached Christ to them. [8:6]And the multitudes
attended with one accord to the things said by Philip, when they heard
him and saw the miracles which he performed.  [8:7]For impure spirits
came out of many who had them, crying with a loud voice; and many
paralytics and lame persons were cured; [8:8]and there was great joy in
that city.

2 [8:9]And there was a man by the name of Simon who formerly practised
magic in that city, and astonished the nation of Samaria, saying that
he was some great person, [8:10]to whom all from the least to the
greatest attended, saying, This is the power of God which is called
great. [8:11]And they attended to him because for a long time he had
astonished them with his magic arts. [8:12]But because they believed
Philip preaching the good news of the kingdom of God and the name of
Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. [8:13]And Simon
also himself believed, and being baptized attended constantly on
Philip; and beholding the mighty works and miracles that were
performed, he was astonished.

3 [8:14]And the apostles at Jerusalem hearing that Samaria had received
the word of God, sent to them Peter and John, [8:15]who came down and
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit; [8:16]for it
had not yet fallen on any of them, only they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus. [8:17] Then they laid hands on them and they
received the Holy Spirit. [8:18]And Simon seeing that the Holy Spirit
was given by the imposition of the hands of the apostles, offered them
money, [8:19]saying, Give me this power, that on whomsoever I lay my
hand he may receive the Holy Spirit. [8:20]But Peter said to him, Your
money go to perdition with you; because you have thought to purchase
the gift of God with money. [8:21]You have no part nor inheritance in
this work; for your heart is not right before God. [8:22]Turn your mind
therefore from this your wickedness, and pray the Lord if perhaps the
thought of your mind may be forgiven you; [8:23]for I see you are in
the gall of bitterness and bond of wickedness.  [8:24]And Simon
answered and said, Pray to the Lord for me, that none of the things
which you have said may come upon me.

4 [8:25]They then having fully testified and spoken the word of the
Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the good news to many
villages of the Samaritans. [8:26]And an angel of the Lord spoke to
Philip, saying, Arise and go to the south, by the way that leads from
Jerusalem to Gaza; this is a wilderness.  [8:27]And he arose and went.
And behold a man, an Ethiopian eunuch, an officer of Candace queen of
the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasures, who had come to
Jerusalem to worship, [8:28]and he was returning and sitting in his
chariot reading the prophet Isaiah.

5 [8:29]And the Spirit said to Philip, Go forward and join yourself to
his chariot. [8:30]And Philip running forward heard him reading the
prophet Isaiah, and he said, Do you really understand what you read?
[8:31]And he said [No]; for how can I unless some one teaches me? And
he invited Philip to come up and sit with him. [8:32]And the passage of
Scripture which he was reading, was this; As a sheep is led to
slaughter, and as a lamb before one that shears him is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth.  [8:33]In his humiliation his judgment was taken
away; and who will tell of his generation? for his life was taken from
the earth.

6 [8:34]And the eunuch answered and said to Philip, Of whom I pray you
does the prophet say this? of himself or of some other one? [8:35]And
Philip opening his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, preached
to him the good news of Jesus. [8:36]And as they went on the way they
came to a certain water, and the eunuch said, Behold water; what
hinders me from being baptized?  [8:38]And he commanded the chariot to
stop, and they both went down to the water, both Philip and the eunuch,
and he baptized him. [8:39]And when they went up from the water the
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no more;
for he went his way rejoicing. [8:40]But Philip was found at Azotus,
and passing through he preached the good news to all the cities till he
came to Caesarea.




CHAPTER VII. THE CONVERSION OF SAUL, PETER CURING AENEAS, AND RAISING DORCAS FROM THE DEAD.


1 [9:1]BUT Saul, yet breathing out threatening and slaughter against
the disciples of the Lord, went to the chief priest [9:2]and asked of
him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of that
way, he might bring them bound, men and women, to Jerusalem. [9:3]And
he was going and had come nigh to Damascus, and suddenly a light shone
around him from heaven, [9:4]and falling on the earth he heard a voice
saying to him, Saul, Saul, Why do you persecute me? [9:5]And he said,
Who are you, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom you persecute. [9:6]But
arise and enter into the city, and it shall be told you what you must
do. [9:7]And the men travelling with him stood amazed, hearing indeed
the voice, but beholding no one. [9:8]And Saul arose from the earth,
and his eyes being opened he saw nothing; and leading him by the hand
they conducted him to Damascus.  [9:9]And he was three days without
sight, and neither eat nor drank.

2 [9:10]And there was a certain disciple at Damascus by the name of
Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias. And he said,
Behold, I am here, Lord. [9:11]And the Lord said to him, Arise and go
to the street called Straight, and inquire at the house of Judas for [a
man] by the name of Saul of Tarsus; for behold, he prays, [9:12]and has
seen a man by the name of Ananias coming and putting a hand on him,
that he might receive his sight. [9:13]And Ananias answered, Lord, I
have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to your
saints at Jerusalem; [9:14]and here he has power from the chief priests
to bind all that call on your name. [9:15]But the Lord said to him, Go,
for he is a chosen vessel to me, to bear my name both before nations
and kings, and the children of Israel; [9:16]for I will show him how
great things he must suffer for my name.

3 [9:17]And Ananias went and entered into the house, and laying hands
on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me, Jesus who appeared to
you on the way which you came, that you may receive sight and be filled
with the Holy Spirit. [9:18]And immediately there fell from his eyes as
it were scales, and he received his sight, and rising up was baptized,
[9:19]and having received food was strengthened.

4 And he was with the disciples at Damascus some days; [9:20]and
immediately in the synagogues he preached Jesus, that this is the Son
of God. [9:21]And all that heard him were astonished and said, Is not
this he that destroyed those who called on this name at Jerusalem, and
has come here for this purpose, that he might lead them bound to the
chief priests? [9:22]But Saul increased in power and confounded the
Jews living at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.

5 [9:23]And when some days had passed, the Jews took counsel to kill
him; [9:24]and their design was made known to Saul. And they watched
the gates day and night to kill him; [9:25]but the disciples took him
by night and sent him away by the wall, letting him down in a
store-basket.

6 [9:26]And going to Jerusalem he endeavored to join the disciples; and
they all feared him, not believing that he was a disciple. [9:27]But
Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and related to them
how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and
how he had spoken boldly in Damascus in the name of Jesus. [9:28]And he
was with them, entering in and going out at Jerusalem, [9:29]and
speaking boldly in the name of the Lord; and he spoke and disputed with
the Hellenists; and they undertook to kill him; [9:30]but the brothers
knowing it led him away to Caesarea and sent him to Tarsus.

7 [9:31]Then had the church peace in all Judea and Galilee and Samaria,
and being built up, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the Holy Spirit, they were multiplied.  [9:32]And Peter
passing through all places, went down also to the saints living at
Lydda. [9:33]And he found there a certain man by the name of AEneas,
who had lain on a bed for eight years, and was a paralytic. [9:34]And
Peter said to him, AEneas, Jesus Christ cures you; arise and make your
bed for yourself. And he immediately arose; [9:35]and all those who
lived at Lydda and Sharon saw him, and turned to the Lord.

8 [9:36]And there was at Joppa a certain female disciple called
Tabitha, which being interpreted is called, Dorcas; she was full of
good works and charities which she bestowed. [9:37]And in those days
she was sick and died; and having washed they put her in an upper room.
[9:38]But Lydda being nigh to Joppa, the disciples hearing that Peter
was there sent two men to him requesting, Do not delay to come to us.
[9:39]And Peter arose and came with them; and when he had come they led
him into the upper room, and all the widows stood by weeping and
showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with
them. [9:40] And Peter putting them all out knelt down and prayed, and
turning to the body he said, Tabitha, arise! And she opened her eyes,
and seeing Peter sat up. [9:41] And giving her his hand he raised her
up, and calling the saints and widows presented her living.  [9:42]And
this was known in all Joppa, and many believed on the Lord. [9:43]And
Peter continued many days at Joppa with one Simon a tanner.




CHAPTER VIII. THE CONVERSION OF CORNELIUS, AND OTHER GENTILES.


1 [10:1]AND a certain man at Caesarea, named Cornelius, a centurion of
the cohort which was called the Italian, [10:2]a pious man, and one
fearing God with all his house, and bestowing many charities on the
people, and praying to God always, [10:3]saw clearly in a vision, about
the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming to him, and saying to
him, Cornelius.  [10:4]And looking steadily at him and being afraid, he
said, What is wanted, Lord? And he said to him, Your prayers and
charities have come up as a memorial before God. [10:5] And now send
men to Joppa and call for a certain Simon who is called Peter; [10:6]he
lodges with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea.  [10:7]And
when the angel who spoke to him had departed, he called two of the
house servants, and a pious soldier of those that attended constantly
on him, [10:8] and having related all things to them sent them to Joppa.

2 [10:9]And on the next day, as they were pursuing their journey and
had come nigh to the city, Peter went upon the house to pray, about the
sixth hour. [10:10]And he was hungry and wished to eat; and while they
were preparing a trance came upon him, [10:11]and he beheld heaven
opened, and a certain vessel like a great sheet descending, let down by
four corners to the earth, [10:12]in which were all the quadrupeds and
reptiles of the earth, and birds of heaven. [10:13]And a voice came to
him, Arise, Peter, kill and eat. [10:14]But Peter said, By no means,
Lord, for I have never eaten any thing common and impure. [10:15]And a
voice came to him again, a second time, What God has purified, regard
not common. [10:16]And this was done thrice, and immediately the vessel
was taken up to heaven.

3 [10:17]And while Peter doubted with himself what the vision which he
had seen meant, behold, even [then] the men sent by Cornelius, having
inquired for the house of Simon, stood at the gate, [10:18]and calling
aloud asked if Simon who was called Peter lodged there. [10:19]And
while Peter was considering of the vision, the Spirit said to him,
Behold, men seek you; [10:20]arise and go down and go with them without
hesitation, for I have sent them. [10:21]And Peter went down to the men
and said, Behold, I am the man whom you seek; what is the cause for
which you have come? [10:22]And they said, Cornelius a centurion, a
righteous man, and one that fears God, and esteemed by all the nation
of the Jews, was divinely instructed by a holy angel to send for you to
his house and hear words from you. [10:23]Then he called them in and
entertained them.

4 And the next day he arose and went with them, and some of the
brothers from Joppa went with him. [10:24]And on the day following they
came to Caesarea; and Cornelius was expecting them, and had called
together his relations and particular friends. [10:25]And when Peter
came in Cornelius met him, and falling down at his feet worshipped him.
[10:26]But Peter raised him up saying, Arise, I also am a man.
[10:27]And conversing with him he went in, and found many come
together; [10:28]and he said to them, You know that it is not lawful
for a Jew to associate with a man of another nation, or come into his
house; and God has taught me not to call any man common or impure;
[10:29]wherefore, being sent for I also came without objecting. I ask
therefore for what reason you have sent for me? [10:30]And Cornelius
said, From the fourth hour of the day I fasted till this hour, and at
the ninth hour I was praying in my house, and behold, a man stood
before me in splendid clothing, [10:31]and said, Cornelius, your prayer
is heard and your charities are remembered before God.  [10:32]Send
therefore to Joppa and call Simon who is called Peter; he lodges at the
house of Simon a tanner, by the sea, who when he has come will speak to
you. [10:33] Immediately therefore I sent to you, and you have done
well to come. Now therefore we are all present before God to hear all
things which God has commanded you.

5 [10:34]And Peter opening his mouth said, Of a truth I perceive that
God is not a respecter of persons, [10:35]but in every nation he that
fears him and does righteousness is acceptable to him. [10:36]The word
which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching the good news of
peace by Jesus Christ,--he is Lord of all,-- [10:37]you know; the word
which was [preached] through all Judea, beginning in Galilee after the
baptism which John preached, [10:38]Jesus from Nazareth, how God
anointed him with the Holy Spirit and power, who went about doing good
and curing all that were subjugated by the devil, for God was with him;
[10:39]and we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the
land of Judea, and at Jerusalem, whom also they killed, hanging him on
a cross. [10:40]This [man] did God raise up on the third day, and
permitted him to be made manifest, [10:41]not to all the people, but to
witnesses chosen before by God, to us, who eat and drank with him after
he rose from the dead; [10:42]and he commanded us to preach to the
people and testify fully that he is appointed by God the judge of
living and dead. [10:43]To him all the prophets bear witness, that
every one who believes in him has forgiveness of sins through his name.

6 [10:44]While Peter was yet speaking these words the Holy Spirit fell
on all who heard the word. [10:45]And those of the circumcision who
came with Peter were astonished, that on the gentiles also the gift of
the Holy Spirit was poured out; [10:46]for they heard them speaking
with tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter answered, [10:47]Can any
forbid water that these should be baptized, who have received the Holy
Spirit as we also have? [10:48]And he commanded that they should be
baptized in the name of the Lord. Then they desired him to remain some
days.




CHAPTER IX. PETER CALLED TO ACCOUNT FOR ASSOCIATING WITH GENTILES, AND JUSTIFIED; PREACHING TO THE GENTILES CONTINUED.


1 [11:1]AND the apostles and brothers who were in Judea heard that the
gentiles received the word of God. [11:2]And when Peter went up to
Jerusalem, those of the circumcision contended with him, [11:3]saying,
You went in to men that were uncircumcised, and eat with them.
[11:4]And Peter began and related to them in order, saying, [11:5]I was
in the city of Joppa praying, and I saw a vision in a trance, a vessel
like a great sheet descending, let down by the four corners from
heaven, and it came to me; [11:6]and looking into it attentively I
perceived and saw the quadrupeds of the earth and wild beasts and
reptiles and birds of heaven. [11:7]And I heard a voice saying to me,
Arise, Peter, kill and eat. [11:8]And I said, By no means, Lord, for
nothing common or impure has ever entered into my mouth. [11:9]And a
voice answered from heaven a second time, What God has purified do not
you regard common. [11:10]And this was done thrice, and again all were
taken up to heaven.

2 [11:11]And behold, immediately three men came to the house in which I
was, being sent for me from Caesarea. [11:12]And the Spirit told me to
go with them. And these six brothers also went with me, and we entered
into the house of the man. [11:13]And he told us how he had seen the
angel in his house standing and saying to him, Send to Joppa and call
Simon who is called Peter, [11:14]who will speak words to you by which
you shall be saved and all your house. [11:15] And when I began to
speak the Holy Spirit fell on them as also on us in the beginning.
[11:16]And I remembered the word of the Lord how he said, John indeed
baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit.
[11:17]If therefore God gave the gift equally to them and to us, who
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to
forbid God? [11:18] And hearing these things they were silent, and
glorified God, saying, Then to the gentiles also has God indeed given
the change of mind to life.

3 [11:19]And those scattered abroad by the affliction which commenced
with Stephen, went even to Phenicia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking
the word to no one but Jews only. [11:20]But some of them, Cyprians and
Cyrenians, who came to Antioch, spoke to the Greeks preaching the good
news of the Lord Jesus. [11:21] And the hand of the Lord was with them,
and a great number believed and turned to the Lord. [11:22]And a report
concerning them was brought to the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and
they sent Barnabas to go as far as Antioch; [11:23]who having come and
seen the grace of God rejoiced, and exhorted all to adhere to the Lord
with the purpose of the heart; [11:24]for he was a good man and full of
the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a great multitude were added to the
Lord.

4 [11:25]And he went to Tarsus to seek for Saul, [11:26]and found and
brought him to Antioch. And he was with them, and they met a whole year
with the church and taught a great multitude; and the disciples first
took the name of Christians at Antioch.

5 [11:27]And in those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to
Antioch; [11:28]and one of them, by the name of Agabus, standing up
signified by the spirit that a great famine was about to come on all
the world; which also came under Claudius Caesar.  [11:29]And each of
the disciples, according to his ability, determined to send help to the
brethren living in Judea; [11:30]which they also did, sending to the
elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.




CHAPTER X. PERSECUTION BY HEROD AGRIPPA, HIS DEATH.--A.D. 44.


1 [12:1]AND at that time Herod the king put forth his hands to injure
some of the church. [12:2]And he killed James the brother of John with
the sword. [12:3]And seeing that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to
apprehend Peter also,--and it was during the days of unleavened
bread,-- [12:4]and having seized he put him in prison, committing him
to four companies of four soldiers each to guard him, wishing after the
passover to bring him before the people. [12:5]Peter therefore was kept
by the guard; but prayer was made incessantly by the church to God for
him.  [12:6]And when Herod was about to bring him forward, on that
night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains,
and guards kept watch before the door. [12:7]And behold, an angel of
the Lord came, and a light shone in the building; and striking Peter on
the side he awoke him saying, Arise quickly.  And his chains fell off
from his hands. [12:8]And the angel said to him, Gird yourself, and tie
on your sandals. And he did so.  And he said to him, Put your cloak
about you, and follow me.  [12:9]And going out he followed him, and
knew not that it was real which was done by the angel, but thought he
saw a vision.  [12:10]And passing through the first guard, and the
second, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened
to them of itself, and going out they went forward one street, and
immediately the angel left him. [12:11]And Peter coming to himself
said, Now I know that the Lord has really sent his angel and delivered
me from the hand of Herod and all the expectation of the Jews.

2 [12:12]And considering within himself he came to the house of Mary
the mother of John called Mark, where a great number were assembled
together and praying. [12:13]And knocking at the door of the gate, a
female servant, called Rhoda, came to listen, [12:14]and knowing the
voice of Peter she did not open the gate from joy, but ran in and told
that Peter stood before the gate.  [12:15]But they said to her, You are
mad. But she asserted strongly that it was so. And they said, It is his
angel.  [12:16]But Peter continued knocking; and having opened they saw
him, and were astonished. [12:17]And making signs to them with his hand
to be silent, he related how the Lord had conducted him out of the
prison, and said, Tell these things to James and the brothers. And
going out he departed to another place.

3 [12:18]And when it was day there was no small stir among the soldiers
as to what had become of Peter. [12:19]And Herod seeking and not
finding him, examined the guards, and commanded them to be put to
death, and going down from Judea to Caesarea remained [there].

4 [12:20]And he was displeased with the Tyrians and Sidonians; but they
came with one accord to him, and having persuaded Blastus who was over
the king's bedchamber, desired peace, because their country was
nourished by the king's. [12:21]And on an appointed day Herod having
put on his royal apparel, and sitting on the tribunal, made a speech to
them; [12:22]and the people shouted, It is the voice of a god, and not
of a man.  [12:23]And an angel of the Lord instantly smote him because
he gave not glory to God, and being eaten with worms he expired.
[12:24]And the word of God grew and was increased.




CHAPTER XI. THE FIRST MISSION OF PAUL AND BARNABAS TO CYPRUS AND ASIA MINOR.--A.D. 46-49.


1 [12:25]AND Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, having
performed the service, taking with them also John who was called Mark.
[13:1]And there were prophets and teachers in the church at Antioch;
Barnabas and Simeon called Niger [the black], and Lucius the Cyrenian,
and Manaen the foster brother of Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul.
[13:2]And while they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.
[13:3]Then having fasted and prayed and imposed hands on them, they
sent them forth.  [13:4]They, therefore, being sent forth by the Holy
Spirit went down to Seleucia, and thence sailed to Cyprus; [13:5]and
coming to Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of
the Jews; and they also had John for a servant.

2 [13:6]And having gone through the whole island to Paphos, they found
a certain magian, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Barjesus,
[13:7]who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man.
This man having called for Barnabas and Saul desired to hear the word
of God; [13:8]but Elymas the magian, for so his name is interpreted,
opposed them, seeking to turn away the proconsul from the faith.
[13:9]But Saul, [called] also Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit,
looking steadily at him [13:10]said, O full of all deceit and all
craft, son of a devil, enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? [13:11]And now, behold, the hand
of the Lord is upon you, and you shall be blind, not seeing the sun for
a season. And immediately there fell upon him a mist and darkness, and
going about he sought guides. [13:12]Then the proconsul seeing what was
done believed, and was astonished at the teaching of the Lord.

3 [13:13]And those with Paul, sailing from Paphos, went to Perga in
Pamphylia; but John left them and returned to Jerusalem.  [13:14]And
passing on from Perga, they went to Antioch in Pisidia, and going into
the synagogue on the Sabbath they sat down. [13:15]And after the
reading of the law and the prophets, the synagogue rulers sent to them,
saying, Men and brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the
people, speak.

4 [13:16]And Paul stood up, and motioning with his hand, said, Men of
Israel, and you that fear God, hear. [13:17]The God of this people
chose our fathers, and raised up the people in the exile in the land of
Egypt, and brought them out of it with a high arm. [13:18]And when he
had borne with their conduct forty years in the wilderness, [13:19]and
had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he distributed their
land to them by lot.  [13:20]And after this he gave judges four hundred
and fifty years till Samuel the prophet. [13:21]And then they asked for
a king, and God gave them Saul the son Kish, a man of the tribe of
Benjamin, forty years; [13:22]and removing him, he raised up for them
David for a king, of whom also he said and testified, I have found
David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.

5 [13:23]Of the posterity of this man, according to his promise, has
God raised up to Israel a Saviour, Jesus; [13:24]John having preached
before his coming the baptism of a change of mind to all the people of
Israel. [13:25]And when John completed his course, he said, Who do you
suppose I am? I am not [the Christ]; but behold, there comes after me
one the sandal of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.

6 [13:26]Men and brothers, children of the race of Abraham, and you
that fear God, the word of this salvation is sent to you.  [13:27]For
those living at Jerusalem, and their rulers, not knowing him and the
words of the prophets which are read every sabbath, fulfilled them by
condemning [him]; [13:28]and [although] they found no cause of death
[in him], they requested of Pilate that he might be destroyed;
[13:29]and when they had performed all things written of him, they took
him down from the cross and placed him in a tomb. [13:30]But God raised
him from the dead, [13:31]and he appeared many days to those who went
up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the
people. [13:32]And we declare to you the good news of the promise made
to the fathers, [13:33]that God has fulfilled this to us their children
in raising up Jesus, as it is written also in the first psalm, You are
my son, to-day have I begotten you.  [13:34]And that he raised him from
the dead never more to return to destruction, he said thus; I will give
you the sure promises of David. [13:35] Wherefore also in another place
he says, Thou wilt not suffer thy holy one to see destruction.
[13:36]For David, having in his generation served the will of God, fell
asleep, and was gathered to his fathers and saw destruction; [13:37]
but he whom God raised up saw not destruction. [13:38]Be it known to
you therefore, men and brothers, that through this man is preached to
you the forgiveness of sins, [13:39]and every one who believes is
justified by him from all things from which you could not be justified
by the law of Moses. [13:40] See then that what is said by the prophets
does not come upon you; [13:41] Behold, despisers, and wonder and
perish, for I perform a work in your days, a work which you shall by no
means believe even if one declares it to you.

7 [13:42]And when they had gone out, [the people] requested that these
words might be spoken to them on the next sabbath.  [13:43]And the
congregation being dismissed, many of the Jews and pious proselytes
followed Paul and Barnabas, who gave them additional instructions, and
persuaded them to continue in the grace of God. [13:44]And on the
following sabbath almost all the city came together to hear the word of
the Lord. [13:45]And the Jews seeing the multitudes were filled with
envy, and contradicted the things said by Paul, disputing and
blaspheming.  [13:46]And both Paul and Barnabas speaking boldly said,
It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken to you;
but since you cast it away, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal
life, behold, we turn to the gentiles. [13:47]For thus has the Lord
commanded us; I have set you for a light of nations, that you should be
a salvation even to the end of the earth. [13:48] And the gentiles
hearing this rejoiced and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many
as were appointed to eternal life believed; [13:49]and the word of the
Lord was spread through all the country. [13:50]But the Jews excited
the pious and honorable women, and the first men of the city, and
raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and cast them out from
their limits.  [13:51]And shaking off the dust of their feet against
them, they went to Iconium; [13:52] and the disciples were filled with
joy and the Holy Spirit.

8 [14:1]And at Iconium they went together into the synagogue of the
Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude of the Jews and Greeks
believed. [14:2]But the unbelieving Jews excited the minds of the
gentiles against the brothers, and made them ill-disposed.  [14:3]Then
they spent a long time in speaking boldly for the Lord, who testified
to the word of his grace by granting miracles and prodigies to be
performed by their hands. [14:4]And the multitude of the city were
divided; some were with the Jews, and some with the apostles. [14:5]And
when a design was formed by the gentiles and Jews with their rulers to
treat them injuriously, and stone them, [14:6]knowing it, they fled to
the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe, and the surrounding country,
[14:7]and preached the good news there.

9 [14:8]And there sat a certain man at Lystra, infirm in his feet, lame
from his birth, who had never walked. [14:9]This man heard Paul
speaking, who, looking steadily at him and seeing that he had faith to
be cured, [14:10]said with a loud voice, Stand up erect on your feet.
And he leaped, and walked. [14:11]And the multitude seeing what Paul
did, lifted up their voice in the language of Lycaonia, saying, The
gods have come down to us in the likeness of men; [14:12]and they
called Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercury, because he was a master of
eloquence.  [14:13]And the priest of the Jupiter which was before the
city brought bulls and garlands to the gates, and wished to offer
sacrifices with the multitudes. [14:14]But the apostles Barnabas and
Paul hearing of it, rending their clothes ran among the multitude,
crying [14:15]and saying, Men, why do you do these things? We are also
men subject to like sufferings with you, preaching that you should turn
from these vain [services] to the living God, who made heaven and
earth, and the sea, and all things in them, [14:16]who in past
generations permitted all nations to walk in their own ways;
[14:17]although indeed he left not himself without a witness, doing
good, giving rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness. [14:18]And saying these things they with
difficulty restrained the multitudes from sacrificing to them.

10 [14:19]But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and having persuaded
the multitudes, and having stoned Paul, they dragged him out of the
city, supposing that he was dead. [14:20]But while the disciples stood
around him, he arose and entered into the city. And on the next day he
went away with Barnabas to Derbe.  [14:21]And having preached the good
news to that city, and made many disciples, they returned to Lystra,
and Iconium, and Antioch, [14:22]confirming the souls of the disciples,
and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many
afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. [14:23]And having
appointed them elders in every church, and having prayed with fasting,
they commended them to the Lord in whom they had believed.

11 [14:24]And passing through Pisidia they came to Pamphylia,
[14:25]and having spoken the word in Perga they went down to Attalia,
[14:26]and thence sailed to Antioch, whence they had been commended to
the favor of God for the work which they performed. [14:27]And having
arrived, and assembled the church, they reported what God had done with
them, and that he had opened the door of faith to the gentiles.
[14:28]And they remained there not a little time with the disciples.




CHAPTER XII. THE COUNCIL AT JERUSALEM ON CIRCUMCISION.--A.D. 50.


1 [15:1]AND certain persons having come down from Judea taught the
brothers, If you are not circumcised according to the custom of Moses
you cannot be saved. [15:2]There being therefore no little dissension
and disputation of Paul and Barnabas with them, they determined that
Paul and Barnabas and some others of them should go up to the apostles
and elders at Jerusalem, concerning this question. [15:3]They,
therefore, being sent forward by the church, went to Phenicia and
Samaria, relating the conversion of the gentiles, and caused great joy
to all the brothers. [15:4]And when they came to Jerusalem they were
received by the church, and the apostles, and the elders, and related
what things God had done with them. [15:5]But some of those of the sect
of the Pharisees who had believed, rose and said, that it is necessary
to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.

2 [15:6]And the apostles and elders were assembled together to see
about this matter. [15:7]And after there had been much debate, Peter
rose and said to them, Men and brothers, you know that in former days
God chose among you that the gentiles should hear by my mouth the word
of the gospel and believe. [15:8] And the heart-searching God testified
to them, giving to them the Holy Spirit even as to us, [15:9]and made
no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by the faith.
[15:10]Now, therefore, why do you try God, to put on the necks of the
disciples a yoke which neither our fathers nor we could bear?
[15:11]But we believe that we shall be saved through the grace of the
Lord Jesus in the same manner as they.

3 [15:12]And all the multitude was silent, and heard Barnabas and Paul
relate what miracles and prodigies God performed among the gentiles
through them. [15:13]And after they were silent, James answered,
saying, Men and brothers, hear me. [15:14]Simeon has related how God
first visited the gentiles to take a people for his name. [15:15]And
with this agree the words of the prophets, as it is written,
[15:16]After this will I return and build up the tabernacle of David
which had fallen down, and rebuild its ruins, and set it up,
[15:17]that the rest of men may seek the Lord, even all the nations on
whom my name has been called, says the Lord who does these things,
[15:18]known from eternity.  [15:19]Wherefore I judge that we ought not
to trouble those who turned to God from the gentiles, [15:20]but to
send to them to abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and
fornication, and things strangled, and blood. [15:21]For Moses from
ancient times has those who preach him in every city, being read in the
synagogues every sabbath.

4 [15:22]Then it seemed good to the apostles and elders, with all the
assembly [the church], to send delegates from themselves to Antioch
with Paul and Barnabas, Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men
among the brothers, [15:23]writing by their hand, The apostles and
elders and brothers, to the brothers in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia,
who are of the gentiles, greeting.  [15:24]Since we heard that some
going out from us have troubled you with words subverting your souls,
to whom we gave no charge, [15:25]it seemed good to us, being of one
opinion, to send delegates to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
[15:26]men who have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. [15:27]We have sent, therefore, Judas and Silas, and they will
tell you the same things by word. [15:28]For it seemed good to the Holy
Spirit, and to us, to put no greater burden upon you except these
necessary things; [15:29] that you should abstain from things
sacrificed to idols, and blood, and things strangled, and fornication,
from which if you keep yourselves you will do well. Farewell.

5 [15:30]They, therefore, being dismissed went to Antioch, and
assembling the multitude delivered the epistle. [15:31]And reading it
they rejoiced at the exhortation. [15:32]And Judas and Silas being
themselves also prophets, exhorted the brothers with much argument, and
confirmed them. [15:33]And having staid [some] time, they were
dismissed in peace by the brothers to those that sent them. [15:35]But
Paul and Barnabas remained at Antioch, teaching and preaching with many
others the word of the Lord.




CHAPTER XIII. PAUL'S SECOND MISSION TO ASIA MINOR.--A.D. 51-52.


1 [15:36]AND after some days Paul said to Barnabas, Let us return and
visit the brothers in every city in which we preached the word of the
Lord, [and see] how they do. [15:37]And Barnabas wished to take with
them John called Mark; [15:38] but Paul thought not best to take with
them one who deserted them at Pamphylia and did not go with them to the
work. [15:39]And there was a sharp contention, so that they separated
from each other; and Barnabas taking Mark sailed to Cyprus.

2 [15:40]But Paul choosing Silas went out, commended to the favor of
the Lord by the brothers. [15:41]And he passed through Syria and
Cilicia confirming the churches. [16:1]And he went to Derbe and Lystra.
And behold, there was a certain disciple there by the name of Timothy,
a son of a Jewish woman, a believer, but of a Greek father, [16:2]who
was commended by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium. [16:3]Him Paul
wished to have go with him; and he took and circumcised him on account
of the Jews who were in those places; for all knew that his father was
a Greek.

3 [16:4]And when he went through the cities he gave them the ordinances
to observe which had been determined by the apostles and elders at
Jerusalem.

4 [16:5]Then the churches were strengthened in the faith, and increased
in number daily. [16:6]And passing through Phrygia and the country of
Galatia, being forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia,
[16:7]coming by Mysia they endeavored to go into Bithynia; and the
Spirit of Jesus did not permit them; [16:8]and passing by Mysia they
went down to Troas. [16:9]And a vision appeared by night to Paul; a
certain man of Macedonia standing, asking him, and saying, Come over
into Macedonia and help us. [16:10]And when he saw the vision we
immediately sought to go into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had
called us to preach the good news to them.




CHAPTER XIV. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY AT PHILIPPI ON THEIR FIRST MISSION TO EUROPE.--A.D. 52-53.


1 [16:11]AND sailing from Troas we came in a direct course to
Samothracia, and on the next day to Neapolis, [16:12]and thence to
Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, [and] a
colony. And we spent some days in that city. [16:13]And on the sabbath
we went out of the gate, by the river, where the proseuche [place of
prayer] usually was, and sitting down we spoke to the women who came
together. [16:14]And a certain woman by the name of Lydia, a dealer in
purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard, whose heart
the Lord opened to attend to the [words] spoken by Paul.

2 [16:15]And when she was baptized, and her house, she requested
saying, If you have judged me faithful to the Lord, come into my house
and stay; and she constrained us.

3 [16:16]And when we went to the proseuche, a certain female servant
having a spirit, a diviner, met us, who brought her masters much gain
by divining. [16:17]She following Paul and us, cried, saying, These men
are servants of the Most High God, who declare to us the way of
salvation; [16:18]and this she did for many days. And Paul being
grieved turned around and said to the spirit, I command you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And it came out of her in
that hour. [16:19]And her masters seeing that the hope of their gain
was gone, seizing Paul and Silas dragged them to the market, to the
rulers, [16:20] and bringing them before the prefects said, These men,
being Jews, greatly trouble the city, [16:21]and preach customs which
it is not lawful for us, being Romans, to receive or observe.
[16:22]And the multitude came together against them, and the prefects
tearing off their clothes gave orders to beat them with rods,
[16:23]and having inflicted many blows on them cast them into prison,
charging the jailer to keep them safely; [16:24]who, having received
such a charge, cast them into the inner prison, and made their feet
fast in the stocks.

4 [16:25]But at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sung praises to God,
and the prisoners heard them. [16:26]And suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and all
the doors were immediately opened, and the bands of all were removed.
[16:27]And the jailer awaking from sleep and seeing the doors of the
prison opened, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing
that the prisoners had escaped. [16:28]But Paul cried with a loud
voice, saying, Do yourself no harm, for we are all here. [16:29]And
asking for a light he sprang in, and fell down trembling before Paul
and Silas, [16:30]and bringing them out said, Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? [16:31] And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and you
shall be saved, and your house. [16:32]And they spoke the word of the
Lord to him and all those in his house.

5 [16:33]And taking them that hour of the night, he washed them from
their stripes, and was baptized, he and all his, immediately,
[16:34]and conducting them up into his house he set a table, and
rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God.  [16:35]And when
it was day the prefects sent the lictors, saying, Let those men go.
[16:36]And the jailer told these words to Paul; The prefects have sent
to let you go; now, therefore, go, and depart in peace.

6 [16:37]But Paul said to him, They have beaten us publicly
uncondemned, being Romans, and cast us into prison; and now do they
privately cast us out? No, indeed: but let them come themselves and
conduct us out. [16:38]And the lictors told these words to the
prefects, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans;
[16:39]and they came and besought them, and conducting them out desired
them to leave the city. [16:40]And going out of the prison they entered
into the house of Lydia, and having seen the brothers they exhorted
them, and departed.




CHAPTER XV. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY AT THESSALONICA, BEREA, AND ATHENS.--A.D.  53.


1 [17:1]AND travelling through Amphipolis and Apollonia they came to
Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.  [17:2]And
according to his custom Paul went in to them, and reasoned with them
three sabbaths from the Scriptures, [17:3]explaining and asserting that
the Christ ought to suffer and to rise from the dead; and that this
Jesus whom I preach to you is the Christ. [17:4]And some of them
believed and adhered to Paul and Silas; of the pious Greeks a great
multitude, and of the chief women not a few. [17:5]But the unbelieving
Jews taking certain base men of those about the markets, and exciting a
mob, disturbed the city; and coming to the house of Jason sought to
bring them out to the people; [17:6]but not finding them, they dragged
Jason and some brothers to the rulers of the city, crying, These men
who have turned the world upside down have come here also, [17:7]and
Jason has received them; and they all do things contrary to the
ordinances of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
[17:8]And they excited the multitude and the rulers of the city hearing
these things, [17:9]and taking security of Jason and the rest they let
them go.

2 [17:10]And the brothers immediately, by night, sent away Paul and
Silas to Berea; and when they came they went into the synagogue of the
Jews; [17:11]but these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, for
they received the word with all readiness, examining the Scriptures
daily [to see] if these things were so. [17:12]Many of them therefore
believed, both of honorable Grecian women, and of men not a few.
[17:13]And when the Jews in Thessalonica knew that the word of God was
preached by Paul at Berea, they came there exciting the multitudes.

3 [17:14]Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away, as if to go by
sea; but Silas and Timothy remained there. [17:15]And those conducting
Paul brought him to Athens, and receiving a charge to Silas and Timothy
to come to him as soon as possible, they departed.

4 [17:16]And while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was moved
within him as he saw the city wholly devoted to idolatry.  [17:17]Then
he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and those that were pious,
and in the market every day with those he met.  [17:18]And some of the
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers disputed with him, and some said, What
does this trifler mean to say? And others, He seems to be a preacher of
strange demons; because he preached to them Jesus and the resurrection.
[17:19]And laying hold of him they brought him to the Areopagus,
saying, May we know what this new teaching is which is taught by you?
[17:20]for you bring certain strange things to our ears; we wish
therefore to know what these things mean. [17:21]And all the Athenians
and the strangers living there spend their leisure in nothing else but
telling or hearing something new.

5 [17:22]And Paul standing in the midst of the Areopagus said, Men of
Athens, I perceive that in all things you are extremely devoted to the
worship of demons. [17:23]For as I passed through, and observed your
objects of worship, I found also an altar on which was inscribed, TO AN
UNKNOWN GOD. What therefore you worship as unknown, this I declare to
you. [17:24]The God who made the world and all things in it, this [God]
being Lord of heaven and earth dwells not in temples made with hands,
[17:25]neither is he served by the hands of men as needing any thing,
since he gives to all life, and breath, and all things; [17:26]and he
made of one blood every nation of men to live on all the face of the
earth, determining their appointed times and the bounds of their
habitation, [17:27]that they should seek God, if perhaps they might
feel after and find him, and indeed he is not far from every one of us.
[17:28]For in him we live, and move, and are; as some also of your own
poets have said, For we are his offspring. [17:29]Being therefore an
offspring of God, we ought not to think the Deity to be like gold or
silver or stone, a work of art and human device.

6 [17:30]Overlooking therefore the times of ignorance, God now commands
all men everywhere to change their minds, [17:31]because he has
appointed a day in which he is about to judge the world in
righteousness, by the man whom he has appointed, giving assurance to
all by raising him from the dead. [17:32]But when they heard of a
resurrection of the dead, some scoffed; but others said, We will hear
you again of this. [17:33]So Paul went out from the midst of them;
[17:34]but certain men adhering to him believed, among whom were
Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with
them.




CHAPTER XVI. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY AT CORINTH, HIS VISIT TO SYRIA AND ASIA MINOR.--A.D. 53-55.


1 [18:1]AND after this Paul left Athens and came to Corinth.  [18:2]And
finding a certain Jew by the name of Aquila, a native of Pontus, who
had recently come from Italy, and his wife Priscilla, because Claudius
had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome, he went to them, [18:3]and
because he was of the same trade continued and labored with them; for
they were tent makers.  [18:4]And he reasoned in the synagogue every
sabbath, and persuaded both Jews and Greeks.

2 [18:5]And when Silas and Timothy came from Macedonia, Paul gave
himself wholly to preaching the word, testifying to the Jews Christ
Jesus. [18:6]But when they disputed and blasphemed, shaking his
garments he said to them, Your blood be upon your heads; I, pure, from
this time will go to the gentiles.

3 [18:7]And departing thence he came into the house of a man called
Justus, who worshipped God, and whose house adjoined the synagogue.
[18:8]And Crispus the synagogue ruler believed in the Lord, with all
his house; and many of the Corinthians who heard believed and were
baptized. [18:9]And the Lord said to Paul, in a vision by night, Fear
not, but speak and be not silent, [18:10]for I am with you; and no one
shall attack you to hurt you, for I have many people in this city.
[18:11]And he remained there a year and six months, teaching among them
the word of God.

4 [18:12]And when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose with
one consent against Paul and brought him to the tribunal,
[18:13]saying, This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the
law. [18:14]And when Paul was about to open his mouth Gallio said to
the Jews, If there was any injustice or evil imposition, O Jews, I
would bear with you in a reasonable manner; [18:15] but if it is a
question of doctrine, and of names, and of your law, look to it
yourselves; for I will not be a judge of these things.  [18:16]And he
drove them from the tribunal. [18:17]And they all took Sosthenes the
synagogue-ruler and beat him before the tribunal; and Gallio cared for
none of these things.

5 [18:18]And Paul having remained yet many days took leave of the
brothers, and sailed to Syria; and Priscilla was with him, and Aquila,
having shaved his head at Cenchrea; for he had a vow.  [18:19]And they
came to Ephesus, and he left them there, and entering himself into the
synagogue reasoned with the Jews.  [18:20]And they asking him to stay a
longer time with them he did not consent, [18:21]but taking leave of
them and saying, I will return to you again, if God will, he sailed
from, Ephesus, [18:22]and coming down to Caesarea, and going up and
saluting the church, he went down to Antioch; [18:23]and having spent
some time there he went away, passing in order through the country of
Galatia and Phrygia, confirming all the disciples.




CHAPTER XVII. PAUL AT EPHESUS.--A.D. 55-58.


1 [18:24]AND a certain Jew by the name of Apollos, an Alexandrian by
birth, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, being powerful in the
Scriptures. [18:25]This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and
being fervent in spirit spoke and taught correctly the doctrines
concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John; [18:26]and this man
began to speak boldly in the synagogue, and Priscilla and Aquila
hearing him took him and taught him more accurately the way. [18:27]
And he wishing to go into Achaia, the brothers sent him, and wrote to
the disciples to receive him. And when he came he helped those much who
had believed through the grace; [18:28]for he argued powerfully against
the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.

2 [19:1]And when Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, passing through the
higher portions of the country, came to Ephesus, and found certain
disciples; [19:2] and he said to them, Have you received the Holy
Spirit since you believed? And they said to him, We have not heard that
there is a Holy Spirit. [19:3]And he said to them, With what then were
you baptized? And they said, With John's baptism. [19:4]Paul said, John
indeed baptized [administered] the baptism of a change of mind, telling
the people to believe on him that was to come after him, that is, on
Jesus. [19:5]And hearing this they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus: [19:6]and Paul putting his hands on them, the Holy Spirit
came on them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. [19:7]And all
the men were about twelve.

3 [19:8]And going into the synagogue he spoke boldly, for three months,
reasoning and persuading in favor of the kingdom of God.  [19:9]But
when some were hardened and believed not, speaking evil of the way
before the multitude, he left them and separated the disciples from
them, and reasoned day by day in the school of one Tyrannus. [19:10]And
this was done for two years, so that all who lived in Asia heard the
word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.

4 [19:11]And God performed unusual miracles by the hands of Paul,
[19:12]so that napkins and aprons were brought from him to the sick,
and their diseases left them, and the evil spirits went out of them.
[19:13]And some of the travelling Jewish exorcists undertook to call
over those that had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I
adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul preaches. [19:14]And there were some
seven sons of Sceva, a Jew, a chief priest, who did this. [19:15]But
the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but
who are you?  [19:16]And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped
upon them, and overcome them, and prevailed against them, so that they
escaped from his house, naked and wounded. [19:17]And this was known
both to all the Jews and Greeks who lived at Ephesus, and fear fell on
them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified; [19:18]and many
of those who believed came and confessed, and showed their practices.
[19:19]And many of those who practised secret arts brought their books,
and burnt them before all; and they computed the price of them, and
found it to be fifty thousand [didrachmas] of silver [$8,333].
[19:20]So the word of the Lord increased powerfully and prevailed.

6 [19:21]And when these things were accomplished, Paul was disposed by
the Spirit, passing through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem,
saying, After I have been there I must see Rome.  [19:22]And sending
two that served him into Macedonia, Timothy and Erastus, he continued a
time in Asia.

7 [19:23]And there was at that time no small tumult about the way [of
the Lord]. [19:24]For a certain Demetrius by name, a silversmith, who
made silver temples of Diana, and afforded his artisans no small gain,
[19:25]assembling them together and laborers of like employments, said,
Men, you know that our prosperity is derived from this employment,
[19:26]and you see and hear, that not only at Ephesus, but in almost
all Asia, this Paul has led away a great multitude by persuasion,
saying that things which are made by hands are not gods. [19:27]And not
only this work of ours is in danger of coming into contempt, but even
the temple of the great goddess Diana of being set at nought, and her
majesty also which all Asia and the world worships, of being destroyed.

8 [19:28]And hearing this they were full of wrath, and cried, saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians! [19:29]And the whole city was full of
confusion; and they rushed with one accord to the theatre, taking Gaius
and Aristarchus, Macedonians, fellow travellers of Paul. [19:30]And
Paul wishing to go in to the people, the disciples did not permit him;
[19:31]and some of the rulers of Asia also, who were friendly to him,
sending to him, besought him not to expose himself in the theatre.
[19:32]Some therefore cried one thing, and some another; for the
assembly was confused, and the greater part knew not for what reason
they had come together. [19:33]And they advanced Alexander from the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward; and Alexander motioning with
his hand, wished to defend himself before the people.  [19:34]But
knowing that he was a Jew, there was one voice from all, for about two
hours, crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

9 [19:35]And the clerk having stilled the multitude, said, Men of
Ephesus, what man is there who does not know that the city of the
Ephesians is a worshipper of the great Diana, and of the Jove descended
[image]? [19:36]These things therefore being indisputable, it is best
to be quiet, and do nothing rashly.  [19:37]For you have brought these
men here, who are neither temple-robbers nor blasphemers of your
goddess. [19:38]If, therefore, Demetrius and the artisans with him have
a charge against any, court days are held, and there are pro-consuls;
let them accuse one another. [19:39]And if you desire any thing of
other matters, let it be determined in a lawful assembly.  [19:40]For
we are in danger of being called to account for the tumult of to-day,
there being no cause by which we can excuse this concourse. [19:41]And
having said these words he dismissed the assembly.




CHAPTER XVIII. PAUL'S VISIT TO GREECE AND MACEDONIA AND HIS RETURN TO MILETUS.--A.D. 58, 59.


1 [20:1]AFTER the tumult was allayed, Paul calling the disciples and
embracing them departed to go into Macedonia. [20:2]And going through
those parts, and exhorting them with many words, he went into Greece;
[20:3]and when he had staid there three months, and a conspiracy was
formed against him by the Jews as he was about to sail to Syria, he
determined to return through Macedonia.  [20:4] And there followed him
to Asia, Sopater the son of Pyrrhus of Berea, and of those of
Thessalonica, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and
Timothy, and those of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus; [20:5]these going
before waited for us at Troas.  [20:6]And we sailed from Philippi,
after the days of unleavened bread, and came to those at Troas in five
days, where we staid seven days.

2 [20:7]And on the first day of the week, we being assembled to break
bread, Paul preached to them, being about to depart on the next day,
and continued his discourse till midnight; [20:8]and there were many
lamps in the upper room where we were assembled.  [20:9]And a young man
by the name of Eutychus sitting in a window, falling into a deep sleep
while Paul preached long, and being overcome by sleep, fell from the
third story down, and was taken up dead. [20:10]But Paul going down
fell on him, and embracing him, said, Be not troubled, for his life is
in him.  [20:11]And going up and breaking bread, and tasting it, and
conversing a long time till the break of day, he departed.  [20:12]And
they brought away the child alive, and were not a little comforted.

3 [20:13]And we going before by ship sailed to Assos, being about to take
in Paul at that place; for so had he appointed, being about to go on
foot himself. [20:14]And when he met us at Assos, we took him in and
came to Mitylene, [20:15]and sailing thence, on the next day we came
opposite to Chios, and in another day we touched at Samos, and stopping
at Trogylium, on the day following we came to Miletus. [20:16]For Paul
had determined to sail by Ephesus, that it might not be necessary for
him to spend a long time in Asia; for he hastened, if it was possible
for him, to be at Jerusalem at the day of Pentecost.

4 [20:17]And from Miletus sending to Ephesus he called for the elders
of the church. [20:18]And when they had come to him, he said to them,
You know from the first day that I came into Asia, how I was with you
at all times, [20:19] serving the Lord with all humility, and tears and
trials that befell me by the conspiracies of the Jews, [20:20]how I
kept not back from declaring to you and teaching you publicly and from
house to house any thing that was profitable, [20:21]testifying both to
Jews and Greeks the change of mind to God, and the faith in our Lord
Jesus. [20:22]And behold now, I go constrained by the Spirit to
Jerusalem, not knowing the things which shall befall me there,
[20:23]except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city,
saying, That bonds and afflictions await me. [20:24]But life precious
to myself, I make of no account that I may finish my course and the
service which I received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of
the grace of God.

5 [20:25]And now, behold, I know that you all among whom I have gone
preaching the kingdom shall see my face no more.  [20:26]Wherefore I
call you to witness this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men;
[20:27]for I have not kept back from declaring to you all the counsel
of God. [20:28]Take heed to yourselves, therefore, and to all the flock
in which the Holy Spirit has made you bishops, to feed the church of
the Lord which he has purchased with his blood. [20:29]For I know that
after my departure grievous wolves will come among you, not sparing the
flock, [20:30]and of yourselves men will arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. [20:31]Wherefore watch,
remembering that for three years, night and day, I ceased not to
admonish every one of you with tears. [20:32]And now I commend you to
God, and the word of his grace, who is able to build you up and to give
you an inheritance with all the sanctified. [20:33]I have coveted no
man's silver or gold or clothing; [20:34]you yourselves know that these
hands have served my necessities and those with me. [20:35]I have
showed you all things, that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he said, It is more
blessed to give than to receive.

6 [20:36]And having said these words he kneeled down, and prayed with
them all. [20:37]And they all wept much, and fell on Paul's neck and
kissed him, [20:38] grieving most of all for the word which he said,
that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the
ship.




CHAPTER XIX. PAUL AND HIS COMPANY PURSUING THEIR JOURNEY TO CAESAREA AND JERUSALEM, ETC.--A.D. 59.


1 [21:1]AND when we had torn ourselves from them we set sail, and going
in a straight course came to Cos, and on the next day to Rhodes, and
thence to Patara. [21:2]And finding a ship crossing to Phenicia, going
on board we set sail. [21:3]And observing Cyprus, and leaving it on the
left, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre; for there the ship was to
discharge her cargo.  [21:4] And finding the disciples we continued
there seven days; and they told Paul, by the Spirit, not to go on to
Jerusalem.  [21:5]And when we had completed the days we went out and
proceeded on our journey, they all attending us with their wives and
children till without the city, and kneeling down on the shore we
prayed, [21:6]and having saluted each other we went to the ship, and
they returned to their homes.

2 [21:7]Having completed our voyage from Tyre we went to Ptolemais, and
having saluted the brothers continued with them one day. [21:8]And
departing on the next day we came to Caesarea, and going to the house
of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, we staid with him.
[21:9]This man had four virgin daughters who prophesied. [21:10]And
having continued there many days, there came down a certain prophet
from Judea by the name of Agabus, [21:11]and coming to us, and taking
Paul's girdle, and binding his hands and feet, he said, These things,
says the Holy Spirit; Thus will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owns this girdle, and deliver him into the hands of the gentiles.
[21:12]And when we heard these things, we and the people of the place
besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. [21:13]But Paul answered, What
do you do, to weep and break my heart? For I am ready not only to be
bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus.
[21:14]And he not being persuaded, we were silent, saying, The will of
the Lord be done.

3 [21:15]And after these days, having made preparation, we went up to
Jerusalem; [21:16]and some of the disciples from Caesarea went up with
us, conducting [us] to Mnason a Cyprian, an early disciple with whom we
lodged.

4 [21:17]And when we arrived at Jerusalem the brothers received us
gladly. [21:18]And on the following day Paul went with us to James, and
all the elders were present. [21:19]And having saluted them, he related
particularly what God had done among the gentiles by his ministry;
[21:20]and having heard, they glorified God, and said to him, You see,
brother, how many ten thousands there are of those who have believed,
among the Jews, and all are zealots of the law; [21:21]and they have
been informed of you, that you teach all the Jews among the gentiles to
apostatize from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children,
nor to walk according to the customs. [21:22]What then is [to be done]?
They will hear everywhere that you have come. [21:23]Do this,
therefore, which we tell you. We have four men having a vow upon them;
[21:24]take them and be purified with them, and pay their expenses,
that they may shave their heads, and all will know that the information
which they have of you is not correct, but that you walk also yourself
keeping the law. [21:25]But concerning the gentiles who have believed,
we have sent, judging that they should avoid things offered to idols,
and blood, and things strangled, and fornication. [21:26]Then Paul
taking the men, on the following day being purified with them went into
the temple, announcing the completion of the days of purification till
an offering should be offered for each one of them.




CHAPTER XX. PAUL'S APPREHENSION BY THE JEWS, HIS RESCUE BY THE ROMANS, HIS ADDRESS, ETC.--A.D. 59.


1 [21:27]AND when the seven days were nearly completed, the Jews from
Asia seeing him in the temple excited all the multitude, and laid hands
on him, [21:28]crying, Men of Israel, help; this is the man who teaches
all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place, and
besides he has brought Greeks into the temple, and defiled this holy
place. [21:29]For they had before seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the
city with him, and supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
[21:30]And all the city was moved, and there was a concourse of the
people, and taking hold of Paul they dragged him without the temple,
and immediately the gates were shut.

2 [21:31]And while they were seeking to kill him, a report went up to
the chiliarch of the cohort that all Jerusalem was in commotion;
[21:32]who immediately taking soldiers and centurions ran down upon
them; and seeing the chiliarch and the soldiers, they ceased beating
Paul. [21:33]Then the chiliarch approaching took him, and commanded him
to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had
done. [21:34]But some cried one thing, and some another, in the
multitude, and not being able to learn the truth, on account of the
tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the fortress. [21:35] And
when he was on the steps, it happened that he was borne by the
soldiers, on account of the violence of the multitude; [21:36]for the
multitude of the people followed, crying, Take him away.

3 [21:37]And being about to be carried into the fortress, Paul said to
the chiliarch, May I have permission to speak to you? And he said, Do
you understand Greek? [21:38]Are you not the Egyptian who before these
days excited a sedition, and led out into the wilderness the four
thousand men who were murderers? [21:39]And Paul said, I am a Jew, of
Tarsus of Cilicia, a citizen of a not undistinguished city, I beg of
you, permit me to speak to the people. [21:40]And he giving him
permission, Paul stood up on the steps, and motioned with his hand to
the people; and when there was great silence, he spoke in the Hebrew
language, and said, [22:1]Men, brothers and fathers, hear my present
defense before you. [22:2]And hearing that he spoke to them in the
Hebrew language, they kept the greater silence.

5 [22:3]And he said, I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought
up in this city, instructed at the feet of Gamaliel in the accurate
interpretation of the law of our fathers, and am a zealous worshipper
of God as you all are to-day; [22:4]and I persecuted this way to death,
binding and committing to prison both men and women, [22:5]as the chief
priest also bears me witness, and all the eldership, from whom also
receiving letters to the brothers I went to Damascus, to bring those
who were there bound to Jerusalem to be punished.

6 [22:6]And when I was on the way and had come nigh to Damascus, about
noon suddenly a great light from heaven shone around me, [22:7]and I
fell on the earth, and heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why do
you persecute me? [22:8]And I answered, Who are you, Lord? And he said
to me, I am Jesus the Nazoraean, whom you persecute. [22:9]And those
that were with me saw the light, but they heard not the voice of him
that spoke to me. [22:10]And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the
Lord said to me, Arise, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told
you of all things which are appointed for you to do.

7 [22:11]And when I could not see from the brightness of that light,
being led by the hand by those with me, I came to Damascus. [22:12]And
a certain Ananias, a man [living] according to the law, approved by all
the Jews living [there], [22:13]coming and standing by, said to me,
Brother Saul, Receive your sight. And in that hour I looked upon him.
[22:14]And he said, The God of our fathers chose you to know his will,
and to see the Righteous One, and hear the voice of his mouth,
[22:15]for you shall be a witness for him to all men of what you have
seen and heard. [22:16]And now, why do you delay? Arising, baptize and
wash away your sins, calling on his name.

8 [22:17]And when I returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the
temple, I was in a trance, [22:18]and saw him [Christ], saying to me,
Hasten and depart immediately from Jerusalem, for they will not receive
your testimony of me. [22:19]And I said, Lord, they know that I
imprisoned and beat in the synagogues those who believed on you;
[22:20]and when the blood of your martyr Stephen was poured out, I also
stood by and consented, and kept the clothes of those that killed him.
[22:21]And he said to me, Go, for I will send you to nations far away.

9 [22:22]And they heard him to this word, and lifted up their voice
saying, Take away such a man from the earth; it is not fit that he
should live. [22:23] And as they cried and rent their clothes and cast
dust in the air, [22:24]the chiliarch commanded him to be brought into
the fortress, ordering that he should be examined with scourges, that
he might know for what reason they cried so against him. [22:25]But
when they extended him with cords, he said to the centurion standing
by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man, a Roman, and uncondemned?
[22:26]And the centurion hearing this, went and told the chiliarch,
saying, What are you about to do? for this man is a Roman. [22:27] And
the chiliarch came to him and said, Tell me, are you a Roman? And he
said, Yes. [22:28]And the chiliarch answered, I acquired this
citizenship for a great price. But Paul said, I am indeed, and was also
born [one]. [22:29]Then those about to examine him immediately withdrew
from him; and the chiliarch was afraid, knowing that he was a Roman,
and because he had bound him.




CHAPTER XXI. PAUL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM, AND SENT TO CAESAREA FOR SAFE KEEPING.--A.D. 59.


1 [22:30]AND on the next day, wishing to know the truth in respect to
what he was accused of by the Jews, [the chiliarch] released him, and
commanded the chief priests and all the Sanhedrim to come together; and
bringing Paul down he set him before them. [23:1]And Paul looking
steadily at the Sanhedrim, said, Men and brothers, I have lived before
God in all good conscience to this day. [23:2]And the chief priest
Ananias commanded those standing by to strike him on the mouth.
[23:3]Then Paul said to him, God is about to strike you, whitewashed
wall; and do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me
to be struck contrary to the law? [23:4]And those standing by said, Do
you revile God's chief priest?  [23:5]And Paul said, I knew not
brothers that he was a chief priest; for it is written, You shall not
speak evil of the ruler of your people.

2 [23:6]And Paul knowing that one part were Sadducees and the other
Pharisees, cried in the Sanhedrim, Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee
and the son of Pharisees; for the hope and resurrection of the dead am
I under trial. [23:7] And having said this, there was a dissension
between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the multitude were divided.
[23:8]For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither
angel, nor spirit, but the Pharisees confess both. [23:9]And there was
a great cry, and the scribes of the party of the Pharisees rising up
contended, saying, We find no evil in this man; but [what] if a spirit
or an angel has spoken to him? [23:10]And there being a great
dissension, the chiliarch, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by
them, commanded the troops to come down and take him by force from the
midst of them, and conduct him to the fortress.

3 [23:11]And on the following night the Lord stood by him and said, Be
of good courage, for as you have testified of me at Jerusalem, so you
must also testify at Rome. [23:12]And when it was day, the Jews formed
a conspiracy and bound themselves by an oath, saying that they would
not eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. [23:13]And there were more
than forty who took this oath, [23:14] who came to the chief priests
and elders and said, We have bound ourselves under a curse to taste
nothing till we kill Paul. [23:15]Now, therefore, speak to the
chiliarch, with the Sanhedrim, to bring him down to you tomorrow, as if
you were about to investigate his case more accurately, and we, before
he comes nigh, are ready to kill him.

4 [23:16]But a son of Paul's sister hearing of this lying in wait, went
and entering into the fortress told Paul. [23:17]And Paul calling one
of the centurions, said, Lead this young man to the chiliarch, for he
has something to tell him. [23:18]He therefore took him and led him to
the chiliarch, and said, Paul the prisoner called me and asked me to
lead this young man to you, who has something to tell you. [23:19]And
the chiliarch taking him by the hand and leading him aside, inquired,
What is it that you have to tell me? [23:20]And he said, The Jews have
entered into a compact to ask you to bring down Paul to the Sanhedrim
to-morrow, as if about to learn more accurately of something concerning
him. [23:21]But do not therefore be persuaded by them; for more than
forty men of them lie in wait, who have taken an oath not to eat nor
drink till they have killed him, and now they are ready, awaiting an
answer from you.  [23:22]Then the chiliarch dismissed the young man,
charging him, Tell no one that you have informed me of these things.

5 [23:23]And calling two of the centurions he said, Prepare two hundred
soldiers to go to Caesarea, and seventy horsemen and two hundred light
armed troops, after the third hour of the night.  [23:24]And provide
animals to put Paul on, and take him safely to Felix the procurator.
[23:25]And he wrote a letter having this form; [23:26]Claudius Lysias
to the most excellent procurator Felix, greeting. [23:27]I went with
the soldiery and rescued this man, when he was seized by the Jews, and
about to be killed by them, having learned that he is a Roman;
[23:28]and wishing to know the cause for which they accuse him, I took
him down to their Sanhedrim, [23:29]and found him criminated in respect
to questions of their law, but charged with nothing worthy of death or
bonds. [23:30]Being informed that a conspiracy was about to be formed
against the man, I immediately sent to you, commanding also his
accusers to speak before you.

6 [23:31]The soldiers therefore took Paul as they were commanded and
brought him by night to Antipatris, [23:32]and the next day leaving the
horsemen to go with him, they returned to the fortress. [23:33]And when
they came to Caesarea, and had delivered the letter to the procurator,
they also presented Paul to him. [23:34]And having read, he asked of
what province he was; and learning that he was of Cilicia, [23:35]I
will hear you, he said, when your accusers have come; and he commanded
him to be kept in the Praetorium of Herod.




CHAPTER XXII. PAUL'S TRIAL BEFORE FELIX THE PROCURATOR.--A.D. 59, 60.


1 [24:1]AND after five days the chief priest Ananias, with the elders,
and a certain orator, Tertullus, went down and gave information to the
procurator against Paul. [24:2]And he being called, Tertullus began to
accuse him, saying, Having obtained great peace by you, and things
being happily arranged for this nation by your oversight in all things
and in all places [24:3]we accept [it] most excellent Felix, with all
thankfulness.  [24:4]But that I may not further weary you, I beg you to
hear us briefly, with your clemency. [24:5]For finding this man a
pestilence and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the
world, and a chief of the sect of the Nazoraeans, [24:6]who also
endeavored to profane the temple, whom we also took, [24:8]from whom
you will be able to learn by examination of all these things of which
we accuse him. [24:9]And the Jews also assented, saying, These things
are so.

2 [24:10]And the procurator making a sign to him to speak, Paul
answered, Knowing that you have been for many years a judge of this
nation, I shall defend myself cheerfully, [24:11]you being able to know
that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at
Jerusalem. [24:12]And they did not find me in the temple disputing with
any one, or making a disturbance of the multitude, neither in the
synagogues nor in the city; [24:13]neither can they prove the things of
which they now accuse me.

3 [24:14]But this I confess to you, that in the way which they call a
heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers; believing all things
written in the law and the prophets, [24:15]having a hope in God which
they also hold, that there will be a resurrection both of the righteous
and wicked. [24:16]And in this also I endeavor always to have a
conscience without offense towards God and man.

4 [24:17]But after many years I came to bring charities and offerings
to my nation, [24:18]in which certain Jews from Asia found me purified
in the temple, not with a multitude, nor with a tumult, [24:19]who
ought to be present and accuse me before you, if they have any thing
against me. [24:20]Or let them say whether they found any
unrighteousness in me when I stood before the Sanhedrim, [24:21]except
in this one statement which I made, as I stood among them, that I am
under trial by you to-day concerning the resurrection of the dead.

5 [24:22]But Felix put them off, saying, Having learned more accurately
of this way, when Lysias the chiliarch comes down I will decide
concerning your matters, [24:23]and he commanded the centurion that
Paul should be kept, and be freed from bonds, and that he should forbid
none of his friends to serve him.

6 [24:24]And after some days Felix coming with Drusilla his wife, who
was a Jewess, sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in
Christ. [24:25]And as he discoursed of righteousness, and temperance,
and the judgment about to come, Felix being terrified answered, Go for
the present; but when I have time I will call you. [24:26]At the same
time also he hoped that money would be given him by Paul; and on this
account sent for him the oftener, and conversed with him. [24:27]But
after two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and
wishing to gratify the Jews, Felix left Paul bound.




CHAPTER XXIII. PAUL'S TRIAL BEFORE FESTUS, HIS APPEAL TO CAESAR, AND HIS SUBSEQUENT DEFENSE BEFORE AGRIPPA.--A.D. 61.


1 [25:1]FESTUS therefore coming into the province, after three days
went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem. [25:2]And the chief priests and the
first men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him,
[25:3]asking favor against him, that he would send for him to
Jerusalem, having provided an ambuscade to kill him on the way.
[25:4]Then Festus answered that Paul should be kept at Caesarea, and
that he would go down there shortly; [25:5]and then, he said, the
principal men among you may go down with me; if there is any thing
against this man they may prosecute him. [25:6]And staying with them
not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the
next day, sitting on the tribunal, commanded Paul to be brought.

2 [25:7]And when he had come, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem
stood around him, bringing many and weighty accusations which they
could not prove, [25:8]while Paul maintained in his defense, Neither
against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against
Caesar, have I done any wrong.

3 [25:9]But Festus wishing to gratify the Jews, answered Paul and said,
Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem, and there be tried by me for
these things? [25:10]And Paul said, I stand at the tribunal of Caesar,
where I ought to be tried. I have not injured the Jews, as you also
know very well. [25:11]If indeed I have done wrong or committed any
thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die; but if those things of
which they accuse me are nothing, no man may give me up to them; I
appeal to Caesar. [25:12]Then Festus having conferred with the council
answered, You have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar you shall go.

4 [25:13]But after some days king Agrippa and Bernice came down to
Caesarea to salute Festus. [25:14]And when they had staid there many
days, Festus proposed the case of Paul to the king, saying, There is a
certain man left a prisoner by Felix, [25:15]concerning whom when I was
at Jerusalem the chief priests and elders of the Jews gave me
information, asking judgment against him; [25:16]to whom I answered, It
is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man before the accused
has the accusers face to face, and is allowed an opportunity to defend
himself against the accusation.

5 [25:17]When therefore, they came here, making no delay, the next day
I sat on the tribunal, and ordered the man to be brought;
[25:18]concerning whom his accusers standing up brought no charge of
such things as I supposed, [25:19]but had certain questions with him
concerning their religion, and concerning one Jesus that was dead, who
Paul said was alive. [25:20]Being in doubt on the question concerning
these things, I asked if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and be tried
by me there on these charges. [25:21]But Paul appealing, to be kept for
the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I could send
him to Caesar. [25:22]And Agrippa [said] to Festus, I should like to
hear the man also myself. And he said, To-morrow you shall hear him.

6 [25:23]On the next day, therefore, Agrippa and Bernice coming with
great pomp, and entering into the place of hearing with chiliarchs and
men of distinction in the city, at the command of Festus Paul was
brought. [25:24]And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all the men present
with us, you see this man, of whom all the multitude of the Jews
besought me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying out that he ought no
longer to live. [25:25]But finding that he had done nothing deserving
death, and he having appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send
him. [25:26]But I have nothing certain to write to the sovereign
concerning him, wherefore I have brought him before you, and especially
before you, King Agrippa, that on examination I may have something to
write; [25:27] for it seems to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and
not to signify the charges against him.

7 [26:1]And Agrippa said to Paul, You are permitted to speak for
yourself. Then Paul stretched out his hand and made his defense.
[26:2]I think myself happy, King Agrippa, in being allowed to make my
defense before you to-day in respect to all things of which I am
accused by the Jews, [26:3]especially as you are acquainted with all
the customs and questions of the Jews; wherefore, I beg you to hear me
patiently. [26:4]My mode of life from my childhood, the early part of
it being with my nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews, [26:5]who knew
me from the first, if they would testify, that according to the
strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. [26:6]And now I
stand on trial for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers,
[26:7]which our twelve tribes, serving God continually, day and night,
hope to attain; of this hope, King Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews.
[26:8]Why is it judged by you incredible that God raises the dead?
[26:9]I indeed thought with myself that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus the Nazoraean, [26:10]which I also did at
Jerusalem, and many of the saints I shut up in prison, having received
authority from the chief priests, and when they were killed I gave my
vote against them.  [26:11]And punishing them often in all the
synagogues, I compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad
against them, I pursued them even to cities abroad.

8 [26:12]In which [persecutions] also, going to Damascus with
authority, and a commission from the chief priests, [26:13]at midday I
saw in the way O king, a light from heaven shining around me and those
going with me, exceeding the brightness of the sun; [26:14]and when we
had all fallen on the earth, I heard a voice speaking to me and saying
in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? it is hard
for you to kick against the goads. [26:15]And I said, Who are you,
Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom you persecute. [26:16]But rise
and stand on your feet; for I have appeared to you for this purpose, to
make you a minister and witness both of what you have seen and [of
visions ] in which I will appear to you, [26:17]delivering you from the
people, and the gentiles, to whom I send you [26:18]to open their eyes,
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among
the sanctified by faith in me.  [26:19]Whence, King Agrippa, I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision, [26:20]but preached first to those
at Damascus and Jerusalem, and in all the country of Judea, and to the
gentiles, that they should change their minds and turn to God,
performing works worthy of a change of mind.

9 [26:21]On this account the Jews seized me in the temple and
endeavored to kill me. [26:22]Having obtained therefore help from God,
I have continued to this day, testifying to small and great, saying
nothing but what the prophets and Moses said should take place;
[26:23]that the Christ should suffer, and that he first from the
resurrection of the dead should proclaim light both to the people and
the nations.

10 [26:24]And when Paul had said these words, Festus said with a loud
voice, You are mad, Paul; much learning has driven you to madness.
[26:25]But he said, I am not mad, most excellent Festus, but utter
words of truth and sobriety. [26:26]For the king knows of these things,
before whom I speak freely; for I am persuaded that none of these
things have escaped his notice; for this was not done in a corner.
[26:27]King Agrippa, believe you the prophets? I know that you believe.
[26:28]And Agrippa said to Paul, You almost persuade me to be a
Christian. [26:29]And Paul said, I would to God that not only you but
also all who hear me this day were both almost and altogether such as I
am, except these bonds. [26:30]And the king arose, and the procurator,
and Bernice, and those who sat with them, [26:31]and departing they
conversed with each other, saying, This man has done nothing deserving
death or bonds. [26:32]And Agrippa said to Festus, If he had not
appealed to Caesar, this man might be released.




CHAPTER XXIV. PAUL'S VOYAGE TO ROME.--A.D. 61, 62.


1 [27:1]AND when it was determined that we should sail to Italy, they
delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion by the name
of Julius, of the cohort of Augustus. [27:2]And going on board of a
ship of Adramyttium, which was about to sail to places in Asia, we set
sail, Aristarchus a Macedonian of Thessalonica being with us; [27:3]and
on the next day we came to Sidon, and Julius treating Paul with
humanity allowed him to go to his friends, and receive attention.

2 [27:4]Proceeding thence we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds
were contrary, [27:5]and sailing through the sea by Cilicia and
Pamphylia we came to Myra in Lycia; [27:6]and the centurion finding
there an Alexandrian ship sailing to Italy, put us into it. [27:7]And
sailing slowly in those days, and scarcely being by Cnidus, the wind
not permitting us [to proceed in a direct course] we sailed under
Crete, by Salmone, [27:8]and sailing by it with difficulty, we came to
a place called Fair Havens, near which is the city Lasea.

3 [27:9]But some time being spent and navigation not being safe,
because the fast had already passed by, Paul advised, [27:10]saying to
them, Men, I see that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not
only of the cargo and ship, but also of our lives. [27:11]But the
centurion believed the master and owner rather than the words spoken by
Paul. [27:12]And the harbor being inconvenient to winter in, the
greater part advised to depart thence, and, if they were able, to come
to Phenice to winter, a harbor of Crete, which opens to the South and
Southwest.

4 [27:13]And the South wind blowing gently, supposing that they had
attained their purpose, setting sail they proceeded along the coast of
Crete. [27:14]But not long after a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon,
rushed against it, [27:15] and the ship being caught and not being able
to bear up against the wind, we gave up, and were borne along.
[27:16]And running a little under the island called Clauda, we with
difficulty became masters of the boat, [27:17]and taking it out they
used helps, under-girding the ship; and fearing lest they should fall
on the shoal, letting down the mast they were driven in that condition.
[27:18]And we being exceedingly pressed with the storm, on the next day
they cast the cargo overboard, [27:19]and on the third day with our own
hands we cast overboard the furniture of the ship. [27:20]And neither
sun nor stars appearing for many days, and no slight storm being upon
us, at last all hope that we should be saved was taken away.

5 [27:21]Then there having been long abstinence from food, Paul stood
up in the midst of them and said, You ought, men, taking my advice, not
to have sailed from Crete, and to have saved this injury and loss.
[27:22]And now I advise you to be of good courage; for there shall be
no loss of a life of you, but only of the ship. [27:23]For an angel of
the God whose I am, and whom I serve, came to me this night [27:24]and
said, Fear not, Paul; you must stand before Caesar, and behold, God has
given you all that sail with you. [27:25]Wherefore, men, be of good
courage; for I believe God, that it will be as he has told me; [27:26]
but we must be cast on a certain island.

6 [27:27]And on the fourteenth night, when we were borne along in the
Adriatic, at about midnight the sailors suspected that some land was
approaching them. [27:28]And sounding they found twenty fathoms, and
going a little distance and sounding again they found fifteen fathoms;
[27:29]and fearing lest we should fall on rough places, casting out
four anchors from the stern, they prayed for day. [27:30]And the
sailors seeking to escape from the ship, and letting down the boat into
the sea, with the pretence that they were about to put out anchors from
the fore part of the ship, [27:31]Paul said to the centurion and
soldiers, Unless these continue in the ship you cannot be saved.
[27:32]Then the soldiers cut the ropes of the boat and let it fall off.

7 [27:33]And when day was about to appear, Paul exhorted all to take
food, saying, It is the fourteenth day to-day that you have watched and
continued without food, taking nothing.  [27:34]Wherefore I exhort you
to partake of food; for this is necessary to your safety, for there
shall not a hair perish from the head of any one of you. [27:35]And
having said these things, and taken bread, he thanked God before all,
and having broken began to eat. [27:36]And all being in good spirits
they also partook of food; [27:37]and all the souls in the ship were
two hundred and seventy-six. [27:38]And being satisfied with food they
lightened the ship, casting the wheat into the sea.

8 [27:39]And when it was day they did not know the land, but they
perceived a bay having a shore, on which they wished if possible to
thrust the ship. [27:40] And taking up the anchors, they committed [the
ship] to the sea, loosening at the same time the fastenings of the
rudder and raising the top sail to the wind, they bore down towards the
shore. [27:41]And falling on a place with a sea on both sides, they run
the ship aground. And the bow being firmly fixed, remained immoveable;
and the stern was broken by violence.

9 [27:42]And the design of the soldiers was to kill the prisoners, that
none might escape by swimming; [27:43]but the centurion wishing to save
Paul, prohibited them from this design, and commanded those able to
swim to cast themselves into the water first, and go to the land;
[27:44]and the rest, some on boards, and some on parts of the ship; and
in this way all were brought safely to land.

10 [28:1]And when they were saved, they learned that the island was
called Melita. [28:2]And the barbarians showed us no ordinary humanity;
for kindling a fire they received us all, on account of the rain which
was falling, and the cold. [28:3]And Paul having collected a bundle of
sticks and put them on the fire, a viper coming out from the heat
fastened on his hand. [28:4]And when the barbarians saw the creature
hanging from his hand, they said one to another, This man is
undoubtedly a murderer, whom though saved from the sea justice has not
permitted to live. [28:5]Then shaking off the creature into the fire he
suffered no harm; [28:6]but they expected that he would swell up, or
suddenly fall down dead. And waiting a long time, and seeing nothing
extraordinary happen to him, they thought differently, and said, He is
a god.

11 [28:7]Near that place were the lands of the first man in the island,
whose name was Poplius, who received and entertained us kindly three
days. [28:8]And the father of Poplius lay sick with a fever and
dysentery, and Paul came to him, and prayed, and put his hands on him,
and cured him. [28:9]And this being done, the rest also who had
sicknesses in the island came and were cured, [28:10]and they bestowed
on us many rewards, and when we left supplied us with things that we
needed.

12 [28:11]And after three months we sailed away in an Alexandrian
vessel, that had wintered in the island, with the sign of Castor and
Pollux. [28:12]And coming to Syracuse we remained there three days;
[28:13]and proceeding thence we came to Rhegium, and after one day, a
south wind blowing, we came the second day to Puteoli, [28:14]where
finding brothers we were invited to remain with them seven days; and
thus we came to Rome. [28:15]And thence, the brothers hearing of us
came out to meet us even to the Forum of Appius, and the Three Taverns
[fifty-one miles]; and when Paul saw them, thanking God he took courage.




CHAPTER XXV. PAUL AT ROME.--A.D. 62, 64.


1 [28:16]AND when we came to Rome the centurion committed the prisoners
to the prefect of the camp, and Paul was allowed to remain by himself,
with a soldier to guard him. [28:17]And after three days he called the
chief men of the Jews together; and when they had convened, said to
them, Men and brothers, having done nothing contrary to the people or
to the customs of the fathers, I was delivered up from Jerusalem a
prisoner into the hands of the Romans, [28:18]who on trial wished to
release me, because they found no cause of death in me; [28:19]but the
Jews opposing it I was compelled to appeal to Caesar; not that I have
any thing of which to accuse my nation. [28:20]For this reason,
therefore, I have called you to see and converse with you, because I am
loaded with this chain on account of the hope of Israel.

2 [28:21]And they said to him, We have neither received letters
concerning you from Judea, nor has any one of the brothers come and
reported or told any evil of you. [28:22]But we would like to hear from
you what you think, for it is known to us concerning this sect, that it
is everywhere spoken against.

3 [28:23]And appointing him a day they came in great numbers to his
lodging, to whom he set forth and testified the kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus both from the law of Moses and the
prophets, from morning till evening. [28:24]And some believed the
things which were spoken, and others believed not; [28:25]and
disagreeing among themselves they were dismissed by Paul, saying one
word; Well did the Holy Spirit speak by Isaiah the prophet to our
fathers, [28:26]saying, Go to this people and say, Hearing you shall
hear and not understand, and seeing you shall see and not perceive;
[28:27]for the heart of this people has become hard, and they hear
imperfectly with their ears, and they have shut their eyes, lest at any
time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and turn, and I should cure them.
[28:28]Be it known to you, therefore, that the salvation of God is sent
to the gentiles, and they will hear it.

4 [28:30]But Paul continued two entire years in his hired house, and
received all who came to him, [28:31]preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching the doctrines concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all
boldness and without hindrance.





