THE GOSPEL OF MARK. CHAPTER I. THE MINISTRY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST, THE BAPTISM OF CHRIST, HIS TEMPTATIONS, AND THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS MINISTRY.


1 [1:1]THE beginning of the good news of Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
[1:2]as it is written in Isaiah the prophet; Behold, I send my
messenger before your face, who shall prepare your way. [1:3]A voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord! Make his
paths straight.

2 [1:4]John baptized in the wilderness, preaching the baptism of a
change of mind for the forgiveness of sins. [1:5]And all the country of
Judea and all the people of Jerusalem went out to him and were baptized
by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

3 [1:6]And John was clothed with camel's hairs and a leather girdle
about his loins, and he eat locusts and wild honey, [1:7]and preached,
saying, After me comes one mightier than I, the strings of whose shoes
I am not fit to stoop down and untie; [1:8]I have baptized you with
water, but he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.

4 [1:9]In those days came Jesus from Nazareth of Galilee, and was
baptized in the Jordan by John; [1:10]and going up immediately out of
the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit descend like a
dove upon him; [1:11]and there was a voice from heaven, You are my
beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.  [1:12]And the Spirit
immediately drove him into the wilderness, [1:13]and he was in the
wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and was with the beasts; and
the angels waited on him.

5 [1:14]And after John was delivered up Jesus came into Galilee
preaching the good news of God, [1:15]saying, The time is completed,
and the kingdom of God is at hand; change your minds and believe in the
good news. [1:16]And passing along by the lake of Galilee, he saw
Simon, and Andrew, Simon's brother, casting [a net] into the lake, for
they were fishermen. [1:17]And Jesus said to them, Come after me, and I
will make you fishermen of men.  [1:18]And immediately leaving their
nets they followed him.  [1:19]And proceeding a little further on he
saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; and they were in
the ship mending the nets; [1:20]and he immediately called them. And
leaving their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired men, they went
away after him.

6 [1:21]And they entered into Capernaum, and immediately on the sabbath
he taught in the synagogues. [1:22]And they were astonished at his
teaching, for he taught them as having authority, and not as the
scribes.

7 [1:23]And immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an
impure spirit, and he cried out, [1:24]saying, What have you to do with
us, Jesus Nazarene? have you come to destroy us? We know you who you
are, the holy [Son] of God! [1:25]And Jesus rebuked him saying, Be
still, and come out of him. [1:26]And the impure spirit affecting him
with convulsions, and crying with a loud voice, came out of him.
[1:27]And all were astonished, so that they inquired among themselves,
saying, What is this? a new teaching with authority, and does he
command the impure spirits and they obey him? [1:28]And his fame went
out immediately into all the country about Galilee.

8 [1:29]And going immediately out of the synagogue, they came into the
house of Simon and Andrew with James and John; [1:30]and Simon's
mother-in-law was lying with a fever; and immediately they told him of
her. [1:31]And coming, he took her by the hand, and raised her up, and
the fever immediately left her, and she waited on them.

9 [1:32]And at evening when the sun went down they brought to him all
that were sick, and the demoniacs; [1:33]and the whole city was
assembled at the door. [1:34]And he healed many that were sick with
various diseases, and cast out many demons, and suffered not the demons
to say that they knew him.

10 [1:35]And in the morning while it was quite dark he arose and went
out, and departed to a solitary place, and there prayed.  [1:36]And
Simon and those with him followed him, [1:37]and said to him, All men
seek you. [1:38]And he said to them, Let us go elsewhere to the
adjoining villages to preach there; because for this purpose have I
come. [1:39]And he preached in their synagogues in all Galilee, and
cast out demons.

11 [1:40]And a leper came to him beseeching him, saying to him, If you
will, you can cleanse me. [1:41]And having compassion on him, he
stretched out his hand and touched him, and said to him, I will; be
cleansed. [1:42]And the leprosy immediately left him, and he was
cleansed. [1:43]And giving him a strict charge, he immediately sent him
away, [1:44]and said to him, See that you say nothing to any one, but
go and show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing what
Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. [1:45]And going out he spread
and published abroad the report, to such an extent that he [Jesus]
could no longer go openly into a city, but was without in solitary
places; and they came to him from every quarter.




CHAPTER II. CHRIST FORGIVING SINS, EATING WITH PUBLICANS AND SINNERS, AND HIS DOCTRINE OF FASTING, OF THE SABBATH, ETC.

1 [2:1]AND entering again into Capernaum after some days, it was
reported that he was in the house. [2:2]And many came together
immediately, so that there was no room, not even in the places about
the door; and he spoke to them the word. [2:3]And they came to him
bringing a paralytic, borne by four; [2:4]and not being able to
approach him on account of the multitude, they uncovered the roof where
he was, and having made an opening let down the bed on which the
paralytic was laid. [2:5]And Jesus seeing their faith, said to the
paralytic, Son, your sins are forgiven.

2 [2:6]And some of the scribes were sitting there, and reasoned in
their minds, [2:7]Why does this man speak so? he blasphemes.  Who can
forgive sins but God alone? [2:8]And Jesus immediately knowing in his
spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, said to them, Why do
you reason in your minds? [2:9]in what respect is it easier to say to
the paralytic, Your sins are forgiven you, than to say, Arise, take up
your bed and walk?  [2:10]But that you may know that the Son of man has
power to forgive sins on the earth, he said to the paralytic, [2:11]I
tell you, arise, take your bed and go to your house. [2:12]And he was
raised up and immediately taking his bed he went away before all; so
that all were astonished, and glorified God, saying, We never saw the
like.

3 [2:13]And he went out again by the lake, and all the multitude came
to him, and he taught them. [2:14]And passing by he saw Levi, the son
of Alpheus, sitting at the custom house, and said to him, Follow me;
and he arose and followed him. [2:15]And he was reclining in his house,
and many publicans and sinners also reclined with Jesus and his
disciples, for many also followed him. [2:16]And the scribes and
Pharisees seeing him eating with sinners and publicans, said to his
disciples, Why does he eat and drink with sinners and publicans?
[2:17]And Jesus hearing it, said to them, The well need not a
physician, but the ill; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.

4 [2:18]And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fasted.  And
they came and said to him, Why do the disciples of John and the
disciples of the Pharisees fast, and your disciples fast not?
[2:19]And Jesus said to them, Can the sons of the bridechamber fast as
long as the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they cannot fast, [2:20]but days will come when
the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they shall fast at
that time. [2:21]No one sews a piece of undressed cloth on an old
garment; if he does the new piece takes away its fullness from the old,
and the rent is made worse. [2:22]And no one puts new wine into old
bottles; if he does the wine breaks the bottles, and the wine and the
bottles are destroyed.

5 [2:23]And he was passing on the sabbath through the grain fields, and
his disciples began to make their way, picking heads of grain.
[2:24]And the Pharisees said to him, See what they do on the sabbath,
which it is not lawful to do. [2:25]And he said to them, Have you never
read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry? both he and
those with him? [2:26]How he entered into the house of God under
Abiathar the chief priest, and eat the show bread, which it was not
lawful to eat, except for the priests, and gave also to them that were
with him? [2:27]And he said to them, The sabbath was made for man, and
not man for the sabbath; [2:28]so that the Son of man is Lord even of
the sabbath.

6 [3:1]And he entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man
there having a withered hand. [3:2]And they watched him [to see] if he
would cure him on the sabbath, that they might accuse him. [3:3]And he
said to the man having the withered hand, Arise in the midst. [3:4]And
he said to them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath, or to do evil?
to save life, or to kill? And they were silent. [3:5]And looking around
on them in anger, being grieved at the hardness of their hearts, he
said to the man, Stretch out your hand. And he stretched it out, and
his hand was restored. [3:6]And the Pharisees went out immediately with
the Herodians, and took counsel against him to kill him.

7 [3:7]And Jesus went away with his disciples to the lake; and a great
multitude followed him from Galilee, [3:8]and from Jerusalem, and from
Judea, and from Idumea, and beyond the Jordan. And those about Tyre and
Sidon, a great multitude, hearing what he did, came to him. [3:9]And he
told his disciples to have a boat constantly attend him on account of
the multitude, that they might not throng him. [3:10]For he cured many,
so that all who had diseases fell down before him, that they might
touch him; [3:11]and the impure spirits when they saw him fell down
before him, and cried, saying, You are the Son of God. [3:12] And he
strictly charged them not to make him known.




CHAPTER IV. CHRIST'S PARABLES BY THE LAKE, AND HIS STILLING A TEMPEST.


1 [4:1]AND
again he taught by the lake; and a very great multitude came together
to him, so that entering into a ship he sat on the lake, and all the
multitude were by the lake on the land.  [4:2]And he taught them many
things in parables, and said to them, in his teaching, [4:3]Hear!
behold a sower went out to sow; [4:4]and in sowing, some fell on the
way, and the birds came and devoured it. [4:5]And some fell on a rocky
place, where it had not much earth, and it came up immediately, because
it had no depth of earth; [4:6]and when the sun rose, it was scorched,
and because it had no root it was dried up. [4:7]And some fell among
thorns; and the thorns came up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
[4:8]And some fell on good ground, and produced fruit, growing up and
increasing, and bore one thirty, one sixty, and one a hundred. [4:9]And
he said, He that has ears, let him hear.

2 [4:10]And when he was alone, those about him, with the twelve, asked
him the parable. [4:11]And he said to them, To you is given the mystery
of the kingdom of God, but to those without all things are in parables;
[4:12]that seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may
hear, and not understand, lest at any time they should turn, and be
forgiven. [4:13]And he said to them, Do you not know this parable? How
then will you know all parables?

3 [4:14]The sower sows the word. [4:15]And these are those where the
word is sown by the way; and when they hear, Satan comes immediately
and takes away the word which was sown upon them.  [4:16]And these in
like manner are those sown on the rocky places; when they hear the
word, they immediately receive it with joy, [4:17]and have no root in
themselves, but are temporary [disciples]. Then, when affliction or
persecution occurs on account of the word, they are immediately
offended. [4:18]And those sown among thorns are different. They are
those who hear the word, [4:19]and the cares of life, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the desires of other things coming in,
choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. [4:20]And these are those
sown in good ground, who hear the word, and receive it, and bear fruit,
one thirty, and one sixty, and one a hundred.

4 [4:21]And he said to them, Does a light come to be put under a modius
[1.916 gallon measure], or under a bed? and not to be put in a
candlestick? [4:22]For there is nothing hid that shall not be made
manifest, nor any thing concealed that shall not come to light.
[4:23]If any one has ears to hear, let him hear. [4:24]And he said to
them, Consider what you hear. With what measure you measure it shall be
measured to you, and more shall be given you.  [4:25]For whoever has,
to him shall be given; and whoever has not, from him even what he has
shall be taken away.

5 [4:26]And he said, So is the kingdom of God as a man casts the seeds
into the earth, [4:27]and sleeps and wakes, night and day, and the seed
germinates, and grows he knows not how. [4:28]The earth produces
spontaneously, first the stalk, then the head, then the full wheat in
the head. [4:29]And when the wheat delivers itself, he immediately
sends out the sickle, because the harvest has come. [4:30]And he said,
To what shall I liken the kingdom of God? or with what parable shall I
present it? [4:31]It is like a mustard seed, which when sown in the
earth is the least of all seeds on the earth; [4:32]but when sown, it
comes up, and becomes the greatest of all plants, and produces great
branches, so that the birds of heaven can dwell under its shade.
[4:33]And with many such parables spoke he the word to them as they
could hear; [4:34]but without a parable spoke he not to them; and,
privately, he explained all things to his disciples.

6 [4:35]And on that day, when it was evening, he said to them, Let us
cross over to the other side. [4:36]And dismissing the multitude, they
took him as he was in the ship; and other ships also were with him.
[4:37]And there was a great tempest of wind, and the waves beat over
the ship, so that the ship was already filled. [4:38]And he was in the
stern, on the pillow, asleep. And they awoke him and said to him,
Teacher, do you not care that we perish? [4:39]And he arose, and
rebuked the wind, and said to the lake, Hush! Be still! And the wind
ceased, and there was a great calm. [4:40]And he said to them, Why are
you so fearful? How have you no faith? [4:41]And they were greatly
afraid, and said one to another, What man is this, that even the wind
and the lake obey him?




CHAPTER V. CHRIST CURING A DEMONIAC AND THE WOMAN WITH A HEMORRHAGE, AND RAISING A DEAD CHILD.


1 [5:1]AND they came across the lake to the country of the Gerasenes.
[5:2]And as he went out of the ship, a man with an impure spirit
immediately met him from the tombs, [5:3]who lived in the tombs, and
none could bind him with a chain; [5:4]for he was often bound with
fetters and chains, and his chains were broken by him, and his fetters
crushed, and no one could subdue him. [5:5]And he was always night and
day in the tombs, and in the mountains, crying, and cutting himself
with stones. [5:6]And seeing Jesus at a distance, he ran and worshipped
him, [5:7]and crying with a loud voice, said, What have you to do with
me, Jesus, son of the most high God? I adjure you, by God, not to
torment me. [5:8] For he said to him, Impure spirit, come out of the
man. [5:9]And he asked him, What is your name? And he said to him, My
name is Legion, for we are many.

2 [5:10]And they besought him much that he would not send them out of
the country. [5:11]And there was there on the mountain a great herd of
swine feeding. [5:12]And they besought him, saying, Send us to the
swine, that we may go into them. [5:13]And Jesus immediately permitted
them. And the impure spirits going out entered into the swine, and the
herd rushed down a precipice into the lake, about two thousand, and
were drowned in the lake.

3 [5:14]And those who fed them fled and told it in the city and in the
country; and they came out to see what was done. [5:15]And they came to
Jesus, and saw the demoniac who had the legion, sitting down, clothed,
and in his right mind, and they were afraid. [5:16]And those who saw
related to them how it had been with the demoniac, and concerning the
swine. [5:17]And they besought him to depart from their bounds.
[5:18]And entering into the ship, the man that had been a demoniac
besought him that he might go with him; [5:19]and he permitted him not,
but said to him, Go to your home, to your friends, and relate to them
what the Lord has done for you, and what mercy he has shown you.
[5:20]And he went away and proclaimed in the Decapolis what great
things Jesus had done for him; and all wondered.

4 [5:21]And Jesus having crossed again in the ship to the other side, a
great multitude came together to him; and he was by the lake. [5:22]And
one of the synagogue rulers came, Jairus by name, and seeing him, fell
at his feet, [5:23] and besought him much, saying, My little daughter
is at the point of death; come and lay hands on her, that she may be
restored, and she shall live.  [5:24]And he went away with him; and a
great multitude followed him, and thronged him. [5:25]And a certain
woman having a hemorrhage of twelve years, [5:26]and having taken many
things by many physicians, and expended all her property, and not being
benefited, but rather growing worse, [5:27]hearing of Jesus, came in
the crowd behind him and touched his clothes. [5:28]For she said, If I
can touch his clothes I shall be cured.

5 [5:29]And immediately the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she
knew in herself that she was cured of the plague.  [5:30]And Jesus
immediately knowing in himself that a power had gone out from him,
turning round in the crowd said, Who touched my clothes? [5:31]And his
disciples said to him, You see the multitude throng you, and do you
say, Who touched me? [5:32]And he looked round to see her that had done
this. [5:33]And the woman being afraid, and trembling, knowing what was
done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
[5:34]And he said to her, Daughter, your faith has cured you; go in
peace, and be well of your plague.

6 [5:35]And while he was yet speaking persons came from the house of
the synagogue ruler, saying, Your daughter is dead; why trouble the
teacher? [5:36] And Jesus hearing the word spoken, said to the
synagogue ruler, Fear not, only believe. [5:37]And he permitted no man
to accompany him except Peter, and James, and John the brother of
James. [5:38]And they came to the house of the synagogue ruler, and saw
the tumult, and the people weeping and lamenting much. [5:39]And he
went in and said to them, Why do you make a tumult and weep? the little
child is not dead, but sleeps. [5:40]And they derided him. And putting
them all out, he took the father and mother of the little child, and
those with him, and went in where the little child was; [5:41]and
taking the hand of the little child, he said to her, Talitha cum, which
is interpreted, Girl, I tell you arise; [5:42]and immediately the girl
arose and walked about, for she was twelve years old. And they were
astonished with great astonishment. [5:43]And he charged them strictly
that no one should know it, and directed that food should be given her.




CHAPTER VII. 

CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF DEFILEMENT; CURING A GENTILE DEMONIAC, AND A DEAF AND DUMB PERSON.

1 [7:1]AND the Pharisees and some of the scribes having come from
Jerusalem came together to him, [7:2]and seeing some of his disciples
eat bread with defiled, that is, unwashed hands, [they found fault].
[7:3]For the Pharisees and all the Jews eat not unless they wash their
hands with the fist, holding the tradition of the elders. [7:4]And from
a market, unless they baptize they eat not; and there are many other
[customs] which they have received to hold; baptisms, of cups and
sextuses [1 1-2 pint measures], and brass vessels, and beds. [7:5]And
the Pharisees and scribes asked, Why do not your disciples conform to
the tradition of the elders; but eat bread with defiled hands?

2 [7:6]And he said to them, Well did Isaiah prophecy of you,
hypocrites, as it is written; This people honors me with the lips, but
their heart is far from me; [7:7]but in vain do they worship me,
teaching for teachings the commandments of men; [7:8]for leaving the
commandment of God, you hold the tradition of men.

3 [7:9]And he said to them, Well do you reject the commandment of God,
to keep your tradition; [7:10]for Moses said, Honor your father and
your mother, and, He that reviles father or mother, let him surely die.
[7:11]But you say, If a man says to his father or mother, It is a
corban, which is a gift, by whatever you might be profited by me, [he
shall be free]; [7:12]and suffer him no longer to do any thing for his
father or his mother; [7:13]making the word of God of no effect by your
tradition which you have delivered; and many such things you do.
[7:14]And again calling all the people, he said to them, Hear me, all
of you, and understand. [7:15]Nothing which being out of a man entering
into him, can defile him; but those things which proceed from the man,
these are the things which defile the man.

4 [7:17]And when he had gone from the multitude into the house, his
disciples asked him concerning the parable. [7:18]And he said to them,
Are you also so without understanding? Do you not understand that
nothing which enters into a man from without can defile him,
[7:19]because it enters not into his heart, but into the stomach, and
goes out to the earth, purifying all aliments?  [7:20] But he said,
that which comes out of the man, this defiles him; [7:21]for from
within, from the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, fornications,
[7:22] thefts, murders, adulteries, covetousness, malice, deceit,
lewdness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. [7:23]All these
evil things proceed from within, and defile the man.

5 [7:24]And he rose up, and departed thence to the regions of Tyre. And
entering into a house he wished no one to know it; and he could not be
hid. [7:25]But immediately, a woman whose little daughter had an impure
spirit, hearing of him, came and fell down at his feet; [7:26]and she
was a Greek, a Syrophenician by race; and she asked him to cast the
demon out of her daughter.  [7:27]And he said to her, Suffer the
children first to be filled; it is not right to take the children's
bread, and cast it to the little dogs. [7:28]And she answered and said
to him, Yes, Lord; for even the little dogs under the table eat of the
children's crumbs. [7:29]And he said to her, For this speech, go; the
demon has gone out of your daughter. [7:30]And departing to her house,
she found the little child laid on the bed, and the demon gone out.

6 [7:31]And again going out of the bounds of Tyre, he came through
Sidon, to the lake of Galilee, in the midst of the bounds of Decapolis.
[7:32]And they brought him a dumb man that stammered, and besought him
to put his hand on him. [7:33]And taking him from the multitude by
himself, he put his fingers in his ears, and spit, and touched his
tongue, [7:34]and looking up to heaven he groaned, and said to him,
Ephphatha, which is, Be opened. [7:35]And immediately his ears were
opened, and the cord of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke correctly.
[7:36]And he charged them to tell no one; but as much as he charged
them, so much the more they proclaimed [his works]. [7:37]And they were
astonished above measure, and said, He has done all things well; he
makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.




CHAPTER VIII. CHRIST FEEDING THE FOUR THOUSAND, REFUSING TO GIVE A SIGN FROM HEAVEN, WARNING HIS DISCIPLES AGAINST THE PHARISEES, CURING A BLIND MAN, CALLING FORTH PETER'S CONFESSION, AND PREDICTING HIS OWN DEATH.


1 [8:1]IN those days, again a very great multitude being [around him],
and not having any thing to eat, calling his disciples, he said to
them, [8:2]I have compassion on the multitude, because already they
have continued with me three days, and have nothing to eat; [8:3]and if
I send them fasting to their homes, they will faint by the way, for
some of them are from afar. [8:4]And his disciples answered him, Whence
will one be able to satisfy these with bread here in a wilderness?
[8:5]And he asked them, How many loaves have you? And they said, Seven.
[8:6]And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground; and
taking the seven loaves, and giving thanks, he broke and gave them to
his disciples to set before them, and they set them before the people.
[8:7]And they had a few small fishes; and having blessed them, he
commanded to present them also. [8:8]And they eat and were filled; and
they took up of the fragments that remained over, seven store-baskets;
[8:9]and they were about four thousand. And he dismissed them.

2 [8:10]And entering immediately into the ship, with his disciples, he
came into the parts of Dalmanutha. [8:11]And the Pharisees went out and
questioned him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, to try him.
[8:12]And groaning in his spirit, he said, Why does this generation
seek a sign? I tell you truly, there shall no sign be given to this
generation. [8:13]And leaving them, he entered again into the ship, and
went away to the other side.

3 [8:14]And they forgot to take bread, and had but one loaf with them
in the ship. [8:15]And he charged them, saying, Observe and beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. [8:16]And they
reasoned with themselves, because they had no bread. [8:17]And Jesus
knowing it, said to them, Why do you reason because you have no bread?
Do you not yet perceive nor understand? Is your heart hardened?
[8:18]Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear?
And do you not remember?  [8:19]When I broke the five loaves for the
five thousand, how many traveling baskets of fragments took you up?
They said to him, Twelve. [8:20]And when I broke the seven loaves for
the four thousand, how many store-baskets of fragments took you up? And
they said, Seven. [8:21]And he said to them, Do you not yet understand?

4 [8:22]And they came to Bethsaida; and they brought him a blind man,
and besought him to touch him. [8:23]And taking the hand of the blind
man, he brought him out of the village, and spitting on his eyes, and
putting his hands on him, he asked him, Do you see any thing? [8:24]And
looking up he said, I see men, as trees walking. [8:25]Then he put his
hands on his eyes again, and he looked, and was restored, and saw all
things clearly. [8:26]And he sent him to his house, saying, Go not into
the village.

5 [8:27]And Jesus went away, and his disciples, to the villages of
Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples, saying to
them, Who do men say that I am? [8:28]And they spoke to him, saying,
John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others still, One of the
prophets. [8:29]And he asked them, And who say you that I am? Peter
answered and said to him, You are the Christ. [8:30] And he charged
them to tell no one of him.  [8:31]And he began to teach them that the
Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and
the chief priests, and the scribes; and be killed, and after three days
be raised again. [8:32]And he spoke this word plainly; and Peter taking
hold of him, rebuked him. [8:33]But turning round, and looking on his
disciples, he rebuked Peter, and said, Get behind me, Satan! for you
regard not the things of God, but the things of men.

6 [8:34]And calling the multitude, with his disciples, he said to them,
Whoever wishes to follow after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. [8:35]For whoever wishes to save his life,
shall lose it; and whoever shall lose his life for my sake, and that of
the good news, shall save it. [8:36]For what will it profit a man to
gain the whole world and lose his life?  [8:37]for what is the exchange
for his life? [8:38]For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words, in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him will the Son of man also
be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy
angels. [9:1]And he said to them, I tell you truly, that there are some
of those standing here, who shall not taste death till they see the
kingdom of God having come with power.




CHAPTER X. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF MARRIAGE, CHILDREN AND THE WAY OF SALVATION, HIS DEATH PREDICTED, AND SIGHT RESTORED TO BARTIMEUS.


1 [10:1]AND he arose and went thence into the bounds of Judea, and
beyond the Jordan; and again multitudes came together to him, and again
he taught them as he was accustomed. [10:2]And the Pharisees came and
asked him, to try him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife?
[10:3]And he answered and said to them, What did Moses command you?
[10:4]And they said, Moses permitted us to write a bill of divorcement
and put her away. [10:5]And Jesus said to them, Because of your
hardness of heart, he wrote you this ordinance; [10:6]but from the
beginning of creation, he made them male and female. [10:7]For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and the two shall be one
flesh; [10:8] so that they are no longer two, but one flesh. [10:9]What
God therefore has yoked together, let not man separate.

2 [10:10]And his disciples asked him again, in the house, concerning
this. [10:11]And he said to them, Whoever puts away his wife and
marries another, commits adultery with her; [10:12]and if a woman puts
away her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.

3 [10:13]And they brought him little children that he should touch
them; and the disciples rebuked those who brought them.  [10:14]But
Jesus seeing it, was displeased, and said to them, Suffer the little
children to come to me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom
of God. [10:15]I tell you truly, that whoever does not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter into it. [10:16]And
he took them in his arms, and laid his hands on them, and blessed them.

4 [10:17]And as he was going on the way, one ran before and kneeled
down to him, and asked him, Good teacher, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? [10:18]And Jesus said to him, Why do you call me good?
none is good but one, God. [10:19]You know the commandments; You shall
not commit adultery, You shall not kill, You shall not steal, You shall
not testify falsely, You shall not defraud, Honor your father and
mother. [10:20]And he answered and said to him, Teacher, all these have
I kept from my youth.  [10:21]And Jesus looking at him, loved him, and
said to him, One thing you lack; go and sell what you have, and give to
the poor, and you shall have a treasure in heaven; and come and take up
your cross and follow me. [10:22]And he was grieved at this saying, and
went away sad, for he had great possessions.

5 [10:23]And Jesus looking around said to his disciples, With what
difficulty shall those having riches enter into the kingdom of God!
[10:24]And the disciples were astonished at his words.  But Jesus
answered again and said to them, Children, with what difficulty shall
those who trust in riches enter into the kingdom of God! [10:25]It is
easier for a camel to pass through the eye of the needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. [10:26]And they were greatly
astonished, and said to themselves, Who then can be saved? [10:27]Jesus
looking on them, said, With men it is impossible, but not with God; for
with God all things are possible.

6 [10:28]Peter said to him, Behold we have left all things and followed
you. [10:29]Jesus said, I tell you truly, there is no one who has left
a house, or brothers, or sisters, or a mother, or father, or children,
or lands, for my sake, and for the sake of the good news, [10:30]who
shall not receive a hundred fold now at this present time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions, and in the life to come eternal life. [10:31]But many
first shall be last, and the last first.

7 [10:32]And they were on the way going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus went
before them; and they were amazed, and afraid, as they followed him.
And again taking the twelve aside, he told them the things that were
about to befall him; [10:33] Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son
of man will be delivered up to the chief priests and scribes, and they
will condemn him to death, and deliver him to the gentiles, [10:34]and
they will mock him, and spit on him, and scourge him, and kill him, and
after three days he shall rise again.

8 [10:35]And James and John, sons of Zebedee, came to him, saying,
Teacher, we wish you to do for us what we will ask of you. [10:36]And
he said to them, What do you wish me to do for you? [10:37]And they
said to him, Grant us that we may sit one on your right hand, and the
other on your left, in your glory.  [10:38] And Jesus said to them, You
know not what you ask. Can you drink of the cup of which I drink? or be
baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized? [10:39] And they
said to him, We can. And Jesus said to them, You shall drink of the cup
of which I drink, and be baptized with the baptism with which I am
baptized; [10:40]but to sit on my right hand, or left, is not mine to
give but to those for whom it is prepared.

9 [10:41]And the ten, hearing this, were displeased with James and
John. [10:42]And Jesus called them and said to them, You know that
those who desire to rule the gentiles exercise lordship over them, and
their great men exercise authority over them; [10:43]but it shall not
be so with you. But whoever wishes to be great among you, let him be
your minister; [10:44]and whoever wishes to be first of you, let him be
a servant of all.  [10:45]For the Son of man also came not to be
served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many.

10 [10:46]And they came to Jericho. And as he went from Jericho, and
his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timeus, Bartimeus, a
blind beggar, sat by the way. [10:47]And hearing that Jesus was the
Nazarene, he cried, saying, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.
[10:48]And many charged him to be still.  But he cried much more, Son
of David, have mercy on me.  [10:49]And Jesus stopping, said, Call him.
And they called the blind man, saying to him, Be of good courage;
arise, he calls you. [10:50]And he cast aside his garment, and leaping
up went to Jesus. [10:51]And Jesus answered him and said, What do you
wish me to do for you? And the blind man said to him, Rabboni, that I
may receive my sight. [10:52]And Jesus said to him, Go; your faith has
cured you. And he immediately received sight, and followed him in the
way.




CHAPTER XI. CHRIST ENTERING JERUSALEM IN TRIUMPH, CURSING THE BARREN FIG TREE, PURIFYING THE TEMPLE, INCULCATING FAITH IN GOD, AND REPLYING TO THE PHARISEES.


1 [11:1]AND when they came near to Jerusalem, at Bethphage and Bethany,
at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, [11:2]and said to
them, Go into the village opposite to you, and as you enter it you will
immediately find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat; untie him and
bring him. [11:3]And if any one says to you, Why do you do this? say,
The Lord has need of him, and he will immediately send him. [11:4]And
they went and found a colt tied at the door without, at the crossing of
the streets, and they untied him. [11:5]And some of those standing
there said to them, Why do you untie the colt? [11:6]And they said as
Jesus directed, and they let them go.

2 [11:7]And they brought the colt to Jesus, and put on it their
clothes, and he sat on it. [11:8]And many spread their clothes in the
way; and others cutting branches from the trees spread them in the way;
[11:9]and those who went before, and those who followed, cried,
Hosanna! Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord!
[11:10]Blessed is the kingdom of our father David, which is coming!
Hosanna in the highest [heavens]! [11:11]And Jesus went into Jerusalem,
and into the temple, and looking round on all things when it was now
evening he went out to Bethany with the twelve.

3 [11:12]And on the next day as they returned from Bethany he was
hungry; [11:13]and seeing a fig tree at a distance having leaves, he
went to see if he could find any thing on it. And having come to it, he
found nothing except leaves, for it was not time for figs. [11:14]And
he spoke and said to it, Let no one eat fruit of you forever! And his
disciples heard him.

4 [11:15]And they came to Jerusalem, and going into the temple he cast
out those that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables
of the brokers, and the seats of those that sold doves, [11:16]and
permitted no one to carry a vessel through the temple. [11:17]And he
taught them, saying, It is written, my house shall be called a house of
prayer for all nations; but you have made it a den of robbers.
[11:18]And the scribes and chief priests came and sought how they might
destroy him, for they feared him, because all the people were
astonished at his teaching. [11:19]And when it was evening he went out
of the city.

5 [11:20]And passing along in the morning, they saw the fig tree dried
up from the roots. [11:21]And Peter remembering, said to him, Rabbi,
behold the fig tree which you cursed is dried up.  [11:22]And Jesus
answered and said to them, Have faith in God; [11:23]I tell you truly,
that whoever shall say to this mountain, be raised up and be cast into
the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what
he says will be done, whatever he says shall be done for him.
[11:24]Therefore I tell you, all things whatever which you ask in
prayer, believe that you shall receive them, and you shall have them.
[11:25] And when you stand praying, forgive if you have any thing
against any, that your Father in heaven may also forgive your offenses.

6 [11:27]And they came again to Jerusalem; and as he was walking in the
temple, the chief priests, and scribes, and elders came to him,
[11:28]and said to him, By what authority do you do these things? or
who gave you this authority to do them? [11:29]And Jesus said to them,
I will ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell you by what
authority I do these things. [11:30]The baptism of John; was it from
heaven, or of men? answer me.  [11:31]And they reasoned with
themselves, saying, If we say from heaven, he will say, Why did you not
believe him? [11:32]But if we say from men, they feared the people, for
all considered John as a prophet indeed. [11:33]And they answered and
said to Jesus, We do not know. And Jesus said to them, Neither do I
tell you by what authority I do these things.

7 [12:1]And he said to them, in parables, A man planted a vineyard and
made a hedge about it, and dug a wine-vat, and built a tower, and let
it out to husbandmen, and went abroad. [12:2]And he sent a servant to
the husbandmen at the time to receive from the husbandmen of the fruits
of the vineyard; [12:3] and they took him, and beat him, and sent him
away empty. [12:4]And again he sent another servant to them, and they
wounded him on the head, and treated him shamefully. [12:5]And he sent
another, and they killed him; and many others, and they beat some, and
killed some. [12:6]Having yet one beloved son, he sent him last to
them, saying, They will reverence my son.

8 [12:7]But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.  [12:8]And
seizing him, they killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.
[12:9]What will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy
those husbandmen, and let the vineyard to others. [12:10]Have you not
read this Scripture, The stone which the builders rejected, has become
the head of a corner; [12:11]this is from the Lord, and it is wonderful
in our eyes?  [12:12]And they sought to take him, and feared the
multitude, for they knew that he spoke this parable against them. And
they left him, and went away.

9 [12:13]And they sent to him some of the Pharisees and Herodians to
ensnare him in his words. [12:14]And they came and said to him,
Teacher, we know that you are true, and care for no one, for you
respect not the face of men, but teach the way of God in truth. Is it
lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or not? [12:15]Shall we pay? or shall
we not pay? But he knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why do you
try me? Bring me a denarius [14 cents], that I may see it. [12:16]And
they brought him one. And he said to them, Whose is this figure, and
the inscription? And they said to him, Caesar's. [12:17]And Jesus said,
Render Caesar's dues to Caesar, and God's to God. And they wondered at
him.

10 [12:18]And the Sadducees came to him, who say there is no
resurrection, and asked him, saying, [12:19]Teacher, Moses wrote to us,
that if one's brother dies and leaves a wife, and leaves no child, his
brother shall take his wife and raise up children for his brother.
[12:20]There were seven brothers; and the first took a wife and died,
and left no child; [12:21]and the second took her, and died leaving no
child; and the third in like manner. [12:22]And the seven left no
child. Last of all, the woman died also. [12:23]In the resurrection,
when they rise, whose wife shall she be? for the seven had her as a
wife.  [12:24]Jesus said to them, Do you not err on this account, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God? [12:25]For when they rise
from the dead, they neither marry nor are married, but are like angels
in heaven. [12:26]But concerning the dead, that they rise, have you not
read in the book of Moses, how God spoke to him at the bush, saying, I
am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
[12:27]He is not a God of the dead, but of the living; you greatly err.

11 [12:28]And one of the scribes coming forward hearing them disputing,
knowing that he answered them well, asked him, What commandment is
first of all? [12:29] Jesus answered, First is, Hear Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord; [12:30]and you shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength.
[12:31]Second is this, You shall love your neighbor as yourself. There
is no other commandment greater than these. [12:32]And the scribe said
to him, Well, teacher, you have said truly; there is one [God], and no
other but him; [12:33]and to love him with all the heart, and all the
understanding, and all the strength, and to love one's neighbor as
himself, is more than all burnt offerings and sacrifices. [12:34]And
Jesus seeing him, that he answered understandingly, said to him, You
are not far from the kingdom of God; and no one dared to question him
more.

12 [12:35]And Jesus answered and said, teaching in the temple, How do
the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David?  [12:36]David
himself said, by the Holy Spirit, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my
right hand, till I make your enemies your footstool. [12:37]David
himself calls him Lord, and whence is he his son? And the great
multitude heard him gladly.

13 [12:38]And he said to them in his teaching, Beware of the scribes
who desire to walk in long robes, and desire salutations in the
markets, [12:39]and the first seats in the synagogues, and the first
places at feasts; [12:40]who devour widows' houses, and for a pretence
make long prayers. They shall receive a greater judgment.

14 [12:41]And sitting opposite to the treasury, he observed how the
multitude cast copper into the treasury. And many rich men cast in
much; [12:42]and one poor widow came and cast in two lepta, which is a
quadrans [4 mills]. [12:43] And calling his disciples, he said to them,
I tell you truly, that this poor widow has cast in more than all who
have cast into the treasury.  [12:44]For all [others] have cast in of
their abundance; but she of her want has cast in all that she had her
entire living.




CHAPTER XII. CHRIST PREDICTING THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM, AND OF THE JEWISH COMMONWEALTH.


1 [13:1]AND as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples said to
him, Teacher, see what stones, and what buildings!  [13:2]And Jesus
said to him, Do you see these great buildings?  There shall not be left
a stone upon a stone, which shall not be thrown down. [13:3]And as he
sat on the mount of Olives, opposite to the temple, Peter, and James,
and John, and Andrew, asked him privately, [13:4]Tell us when shall
these things be? And what shall be the sign when all these things are
about to be accomplished? [13:5]And Jesus said to them, See that no man
deceives you; [13:6]for many shall come in my name, saying, I am [the
Christ], and shall deceive many. [13:7]And when you hear of wars and
rumors of wars, be not afraid, for these things must be; but the end is
not yet. [13:8]For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes in [different] places,
and there shall be famines.  These are the beginnings of sorrows.

2 [13:9]But take heed to yourselves; they shall deliver you up to
Sanhedrims, and you shall be beaten in synagogues, and shall be brought
before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them.
[13:10]And the good news must first be preached to all nations.
[13:11]And when they deliver you to afflictions, be not anxious
beforehand what you shall say; but whatever is given you in that hour,
this speak; for it is not you that speak, but the Holy Spirit.
[13:12]And brother shall deliver brother to death, and father, son; and
children shall rise up against their parents and kill them; [13:13]and
you shall be hated by all on my account; but he that endures to the end
shall be saved.

3 [13:14]And when you see the abomination of desolation standing where
it ought not, let him that reads understand, then let those in Judea
flee to the mountains; [13:15]and let not him that is on the house go
down into the house, nor enter to take any thing out of his house;
[13:16]and let not him that is in the field turn back to take his
garment. [13:17]And woe to those with child, and those giving nurse in
those days! [13:18]But pray that it may not be in the winter,
[13:19]for those days shall be an affliction, such as has not been from
the beginning of the creation that God created till now, and shall not
be. [13:20]And unless the Lord had shortened those days no flesh would
be saved; but for the elects' sake, whom he has chosen, he has
shortened the days.

4 [13:21]And then if any one says to you, Behold the Christ is here!
Behold there! believe it not. [13:22]For false prophets shall arise,
and perform miracles and wonders, to deceive, if possible, the elect.
[13:23]But beware; I have foretold you all things.

5 [13:24]But in those days, after that affliction, the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, [13:25]and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers in the heavens shall be shaken.
[13:26]And then shall they see the Son of man coming in clouds, with
great power and glory. [13:27] And then shall he send his angels and
gather together the elect, from the four winds, from the end of the
earth to the end of heaven.

6 [13:28]But learn the parable of the fig tree. When its branch is now
tender and it puts forth leaves, it is known that the summer is nigh;
[13:29]so also when you see all these things occur, know that [the Son
of man] is nigh, at the doors. [13:30]I tell you truly, that this
generation shall not pass away till all these things are accomplished.
[13:31]Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away. [13:32]But of that day, and hour, knows no man, not an angel in
heaven, nor the Son; but the Father. [13:33]Observe, watch, for you
know not when the time is.

7 [13:34]As a man leaving his house to go abroad, and giving authority
to his servants, and to each one his work, commanded the porter to
watch, [13:35] watch, therefore, for you know not when the master of
the house comes; at evening, at midnight, at the cock crowing, or in
the morning; [13:36]lest, coming suddenly, he should find you sleeping.
[13:37]And what I say to you, I say to all, Watch.




CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST AT BETHANY, THE CONSPIRACY OF JUDAS, THE PASCHAL AND LORD'S SUPPER, ETC.


1 [14:1]AND after two days was the passover and the unleavened bread.
And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might take him by
deception, and kill him. [14:2]But they said, Not at the feast, lest
there be a tumult of the people. [14:3]And when he was at Bethany, and
was reclining at the house of Simon the leper, a woman came, having a
vase of ointment of genuine nard, extremely costly, and breaking the
vase she poured it out on his head.

2 [14:4]And some were displeased, [and said] to themselves, Why was
this waste of the ointment? [14:5]For this ointment could have been
sold for more than three hundred denarii [$42] and given to the poor;
and they blamed her. [14:6] But Jesus said, Let her alone; why do you
trouble her? She has performed a good work on me. [14:7]The poor you
have always with you, and you can do them good when you will; but me
you have not always. [14:8]She has done what she could. She anticipated
anointing my body for the burial. [14:9]I tell you truly, that wherever
this good news shall be preached in all the world, this also which she
has done shall be told for a memorial of her.

3 [14:10]And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief
priests to betray him to them. [14:11]And when they heard him they were
glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might betray
him at a convenient time.

4 [14:12]And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said to him, Where do you wish us to go and
prepare to eat the passover? [14:13]And he sent two of his disciples,
and said to them, Go into the city, and a man shall meet you bearing an
earthen pitcher of water. Follow him, [14:14]and where he enters in,
say to the master of the house, The teacher says, where is the public
room in which I may eat the passover with my disciples? [14:15]And he
will show you a large upper room, furnished, ready; and there prepare
for us.  [14:16]And his disciples went out, and came into the city, and
found as he had said to them, and prepared the passover.

5 [14:17]And when it was evening he came, with the twelve, [14:18]And
as they reclined, and were eating, Jesus said, I tell you truly, that
one of you who eats with me will betray me.  [14:19]And they were
sorry, and said to him, one by one, Is it I?  And another, Is it I?
[14:20]And he said to them, It is one of the twelve who dips with me in
the dish. [14:21]The Son of man goes indeed as it is written of him,
but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would be
good for him if that man had not been born.

6 [14:22]And as they eat he took the bread, and having blessed, broke
and, gave to them, and said, Take, this is my body.  [14:23]And he took
the cup, and having given thanks gave them, and they all drank of it.
[14:24]And he said to them, This is my blood of the covenant, which is
poured out for many. [14:25]I tell you truly, that I will drink of the
product of the vine no more till that day when I drink it new in the
kingdom of God.  [14:26]And having sung a hymn they went out to the
Mount of Olives.




CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST AT THE MOUNT OF OLIVES, AND IN GETHSEMANE.


1 [14:27]AND Jesus said to them, You will all be offended; for it is
written, I will smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered;
[14:28]but after I am raised I will go before you into Galilee.
[14:29]But Peter said to him, Even if all should be offended, yet I
will not. [14:30]And Jesus said to him, I tell you truly, that to-day,
on this night, before the cock crows twice, you will deny me thrice.
[14:31]And he said, more strongly, If it should be necessary for me to
die with you I will by no means deny you; and they all said the same.

2 [14:32]And they came to a place which was called Gethsemane; and he
said to his disciples, Sit here, till I pray. [14:33]And he took Peter,
and James, and John with him, and began to be amazed and dejected.
[14:34]And he said to them, My soul is extremely sorrowful, even to
death; remain here and watch.  [14:35] And going forward a little he
fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it was possible, the hour might
pass away from him. [14:36]And he said, Abba, father, all things are
possible to thee. Take away this cup from me; but not what I will but
what thou wilt. [14:37]And he came and found them sleeping, and said to
Peter, Simon, do you sleep? Could you not watch one hour?  [14:38]Watch
and pray that you enter not into trial; the spirit indeed is willing,
but flesh is weak. [14:39]And again going away he prayed, saying the
same words. [14:40]And again coming he found them sleeping; for their
eyes were heavy; and they knew not what to answer him. [14:41]And he
came a third time, and said to them, Sleep henceforth, and be
refreshed. It is enough; the hour has come. Behold, the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners! [14:42]arise, let us go; behold, he
that betrays me is at hand!

3 [14:43]And immediately, while he was yet speaking, Judas the
Iscariot, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude, with
swords and clubs, from the chief priests, and scribes, and elders.
[14:44]And the traitor had given them this signal, saying, Whom I shall
kiss, he is the one; take him, and lead him away safely. [14:45]And
coming, he immediately approached him, and said, Rabbi! Rabbi! and
kissed him.  [14:46]And they laid hands on him and took him.

4 [14:47]And one of those who stood by drew a sword and struck the
servant of the chief priest, and cut off his car. [14:48]And Jesus
answered and said to them, Have you come out as against a robber, with
swords and clubs to apprehend me? [14:49]I was daily with you in the
temple teaching, and you did not take me. But [it was done] that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled. [14:50]And all forsook him and fled.
[14:51]And one young man followed him with a linen cloth wrapped about
his naked body. And the young men caught him; [14:52]and leaving the
linen cloth he escaped from them naked.




CHAPTER XV. CHRIST BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM, AND BEFORE PILATE.


1 [14:53]AND they led away Jesus to the chief priest; and all the chief
priests, and elders, and scribes came together to him.  [14:54]And
Peter followed him at a distance, till he came into the court of the
chief priest; and he sat with the officers and warmed himself before
the light. [14:55]And the chief priests and all the Sanhedrim sought
testimony against Jesus to kill him, and did not find it. [14:56]For
many testified falsely against him, but their testimony did not agree;
[14:57]and some arose and testified falsely against him, saying,
[14:58]We heard him say, I will destroy this temple made with hands,
and in three days will build another made without hands. [14:59]And
neither in this did their testimony agree. [14:60]And the chief priest
standing up in the midst asked Jesus, saying, Do you not answer any
thing to what these testify against you? [14:61]And he was silent, and
answered nothing.

2 Again the chief priest asked him, and said to him, Are you the
Christ, the Son of the Blessed? [14:62]And Jesus said, I am; and you
shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the power, and
coming with the clouds of heaven. [14:63]And the high priest rent his
clothes, and said, What further need have we of witnesses? [14:64]You
have heard the blasphemy; what do you think? And they all condemned him
to be deserving of death.  [14:65]And some spit on him; and they
blindfolded him, and beat him with the fist, and said to him, Prophesy.
And the officers beat him with open hands.

3 [14:66]And Peter being in the court below, one of the female servants
of the chief priest came, [14:67]and seeing Peter warming himself,
looked at him, and said, You also were with Jesus the Nazarene.
[14:68]But he denied it, saying, I do not know [him]; neither do I know
what you say. And he went out into the porch, and a cock crew.
[14:69]And the female servant seeing him said to those standing by,
This is one of them. [14:70]But he again denied it. And after a short
time those standing by again said to Peter, You are certainly one of
them, for you are also a Galilean. [14:71]And he cursed and swore, I
know not this man of whom you speak. [14:72]And a cock crew a second
time. And Peter was reminded of the word, how Jesus said to him, Before
a cock crows twice, you will deny me thrice. And he wept bitterly.

4 [15:1]And immediately in the morning, the chief priests taking
counsel with the elders, and scribes, and all the Sanhedrim, bound
Jesus, and brought and delivered him to Pilate. [15:2]And Pilate asked
him, Are you the king of the Jews? And Jesus answered and said to him,
As you say. [15:3]And the chief priests accused him of many things.
[15:4]And Pilate again asked him saying, Do you answer nothing? see how
many things they charge against you. [15:5]And Jesus answered him not
any more; so that Pilate wondered.

5 [15:6]And at the feast he released to them a prisoner, whomsoever
they chose. [15:7]And there was a man called Barabbas, bound with the
insurgents, who had committed murder in a sedition. [15:8]And the
multitude went up and requested as he had always done to them.
[15:9]And Pilate answered them, saying, Do you wish me to release to
you the king of the Jews? [15:10]For he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him up from envy.  [15:11]But the chief priests moved the
people that he should rather release Barabbas to them.

6 [15:12]And Pilate again answered and said to them, What, then, do you
wish me to do to him whom you call the king of the Jews?  [15:13]And
they cried again, Crucify him! [15:14]And Pilate said to them, [Why]?
for what evil has he done? But they cried more violently, Crucify him!
[15:15]And Pilate wishing to satisfy the multitude released to them
Barabbas; and having scourged Jesus delivered him up to be crucified.




CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST CRUCIFIED, HIS DEATH, BURIAL AND RESURRECTION.


1 [15:16]AND the soldiers led him away into the court which is the
Praetorium, and called together all the cohort. [15:17]And they put on
him a purple garment, and plaiting a thorny crown put it on him.
[15:18]And they saluted him, Hail, king of the Jews!  [15:19]And they
struck his head with a reed, and beat him, and kneeling down worshipped
him. [15:20]And when they had mocked him they took off the purple
garment, and put on him his own clothes, and they led him away to
crucify him, [15:21]and compelled one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was
passing along, coming from the country, the father of Alexander and
Rufus, to bear his cross.

2 [15:22]And they brought him to Golgotha, which is interpreted A place
of a cranium, [15:23]and gave him wine mingled with myrrh; but he did
not take it. [15:24]And they crucified him, and divided his clothes,
casting lots for them which should take any thing. [15:25]And it was
the third hour when they crucified him, [15:26]and the inscription of
his accusation was written, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

3 [15:27]And they crucified with him two robbers, one on his right hand
and the other on his left. [15:29]And those who passed by reviled him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Aha, you that destroy the temple and
build it in three days! [15:30]save yourself, and come down from the
cross. [15:31]In like manner also the chief priests mocking him, with
the scribes, said one to another, He saved others; himself he cannot
save; [15:32]let the Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the
cross, that we may see and believe. And those crucified with him
reproached him.

4 [15:33]And when it was the sixth hour, there was darkness over all
the earth till the ninth hour. [15:34]And at the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, Eloi! Eloi! lama sabachthani? which is
interpreted, my God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me? [15:35]And some
of those standing by, hearing him, said, See, he calls Elijah.
[15:36]And one ran, and filled a sponge with vinegar, and putting it on
a reed gave it to him to drink, saying, Let him alone; let us see if
Elijah will come to take him down.

5 [15:37]And Jesus crying with a loud voice, expired. [15:38]And the
vail of the temple was rent in two, from top to bottom; [15:39]and the
centurion who stood near, opposite to him, seeing that he so expired,
said, Truly, this man was a Son of God.

6 [15:40]And the women also saw from afar, among whom were Mary the
Magdalene and Mary the mother of James the less, and of Joset, and
Salome, [15:41]who also followed him when he was in Galilee, and waited
on him, and many others who had come up with him to Jerusalem.

7 [15:42]And when it was now evening, because it was the preparation,
which is before the sabbath, [15:43]Joseph came, who was from
Arimathea, an honorable counsellor, who also himself expected the
kingdom of God, and went in boldly to Pilate and asked for the body of
Jesus. [15:44]And Pilate wondered that he was already dead; and calling
the centurion asked him if he had been dead for some time. [15:45]And
knowing [his death,] from the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
[15:46]And having bought linen, he took him down and wrapped him in the
linen, and placed him in a tomb which was cut from a rock, and rolled a
stone against the door of the tomb. [15:47]And Mary the Magdalene and
Mary the mother of Joset saw where he was laid.

8 [16:1]And when the sabbath was passed, Mary the Magdalene and Mary
the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might come
and anoint him. [16:2] And very early in the morning, on the first day
of the week, they came to the tomb at the rising of the sun. [16:3]And
they said to themselves, Who will roll away the stone for us from the
door of the tomb?-- [16:4]and looking up they saw that the stone was
rolled away--for it was very great.

9 [16:5]And coming to the tomb they saw a young man sitting on the
right side, clothed with a white robe; and they were astonished.
[16:6]And he said to them, Be not astonished; you seek Jesus the
Nazarene, who was crucified. He is raised; he is not here. See the
place where they laid him. [16:7]But go, tell his disciples and Peter
that he goes before you to Galilee; there you shall see him as he said
to you. [16:8]And they went out and fled from the tomb; and trembling
and amazement seized them; and they said nothing to any one, for they
were afraid.




CHAPTER XVII. AN ADDITION BY AN UNKNOWN WRITER.


1 [16:9]AND having arisen early on the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary the Magdalene from whom he had cast out seven
demons. [16:10]She went and told those who had been with him, who were
weeping and lamenting; [16:11] and when they heard that he was alive,
and had been seen by her, they did not believe it.

2 [16:12]Afterwards he appeared in another form to two of them as they
walked, going into the country. [16:13]And they went and announced it
to the rest; they did not believe it.

3 [16:14]And afterwards he appeared to the eleven, as they reclined,
and reproached their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they
believed not those who had seen him since he rose from the dead.
[16:15]And he said to them, Go into all the world, preach the good news
to all the creation; [16:16]he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that disbelieves shall be condemned. [16:17]And these
signs shall follow those that believe; in my name they shall cast out
demons, they shall speak with new tongues, [16:18]they shall take up
serpents, and if they drink any deadly [poison] it shall not hurt them;
and they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall be well.

4 [16:19]Then the Lord, after speaking with them, was taken up to
heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. [16:20]And they went abroad
and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the
word by the accompanying miracles.





