THE GOSPEL OF JOHN. CHAPTER I. THE WORD.



1 [1:1]IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. [1:2]This [Word] was in the beginning with God.
[1:3]All things existed through him, and without him not one thing
existed, which existed. [1:4] In him was life, and the life was the
light of men; [1:5]and the light shone in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not.

2 [1:6]There was a man, sent by God, whose name was John.  [1:7]This
man came for a testimony, to testify of the light, that all might
believe through him. [1:8]He was not the light, but to testify of the
light. [1:9]The light was the true [light] which lights every man that
comes into the world. [1:10]He was in the world, and the world existed
through him, and the world knew him not. [1:11] He came to his own, and
his own received him not.  [1:12]But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become sons of God, to them that believe on his name,
[1:13]who are born not of superior blood, nor of a will of the flesh,
nor of a will of man, but of God.

3 [1:14]And the Word became flesh and tabernacled with us and we beheld
his glory, a glory as of an only child with a father, full of grace and
truth. [1:15]John testified of him, and cried, saying, This is the one
of whom I said, He that comes after me existed before me, for he was
before me. [1:16]For we all have received of his fullness, and grace
for grace; [1:17]for the law was given by Moses, the grace and truth
were by Jesus Christ.  [1:18]No one has ever seen God; the only Son,
who is in the bosom of the Father, he declared [him].




CHAPTER II. CHRIST DECLARED TO BE THE MESSIAH, AND COMMENCING HIS MINISTRY.


1 [1:19]AND this is the testimony of John, when the Jews from Jerusalem
sent priests and Levites to ask him, Who are you?  [1:20]And he
confessed and denied not, and confessed, I am not the Christ. [1:21]And
they asked him, What then? are you Elijah?  And he said, I am not. Are
you the prophet? And he answered, No.  [1:22]Then they said to him, Who
are you? that we may give an answer to them that sent us; what say you
of yourself? [1:23]He said, I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as Isaiah the prophet
said.

2 [1:24]And those sent were of the Pharisees. [1:25]And they asked him,
and said to him, Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ,
nor Elijah, nor the prophet? [1:26]John answered them saying, I baptize
with water; but among you stands one whom you know not. [1:27]He is the
one coming after me, the strings of whose sandal I am not worthy to
untie. [1:28]These things occurred in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where
John was baptizing.

3 [1:29]On the next day he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, Behold
the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world.  [1:30]This is he
of whom I said, After me comes a man who was before me, for he was
before me. [1:31]And I knew him not; but that he might be made manifest
to Israel, for this reason have I come baptizing with water. [1:32]And
John testified saying, I saw the Spirit descend like a dove from
heaven, and it remained on him. [1:33]And I knew him not, but he that
sent me to baptize with water, he said to me, On whom you see the
Spirit descend and remain on him, this is he that baptizes with the
Holy Spirit.  [1:34]And I have seen and testified that this is the Son
of God.

4 [1:35]On the next day John was again standing, and two of his
disciples, [1:36]and looking at Jesus as he walked, he said, Behold the
Lamb of God. [1:37]And his two disciples heard him say this, and
followed Jesus. [1:38]And Jesus turning around, and seeing them
following, said to them, What do you seek? And they said to him, Rabbi,
which interpreted signifies Teacher, where do you stay? [1:39]He said
to them, Come and see. Then they went and saw where he staid, and staid
with him that day; it was about the tenth hour. [1:40]Andrew, the
brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard from John, and
followed him; [1:41]he first found his brother Simon, and said to him,
We have found the Messiah; which is interpreted, Christ [Anointed].
[1:42]He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looking at him said, You are
Simon, the son of Jonas; you shall be called Cephas; which is
interpreted, Peter [Rock].

5 [1:43]On the next day he wished to go to Galilee, and he found
Philip. And Jesus said to him, Follow me. [1:44]Now Philip was from
Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter. [1:45]Philip found
Nathanael, and said to him, We have found him of whom Moses in the law,
and the prophets, wrote, Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazareth.
[1:46]And Nathanael said to him, Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip said to him, Come and see.  [1:47]Jesus saw Nathanael
coming to him, and said of him, See an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile. [1:48]Nathanael said to him, Whence do you know me? Jesus
answered and said to him, Before Philip called you, when you were under
the fig tree I saw you. [1:49]Nathanael answered him, Rabbi, you are
the Son of God; you are the King of Israel. [1:50]Jesus answered and
said to him, Because I said to you I saw you under the fig tree, do you
believe? You shall see greater things than these. [1:51]And he said to
him, I tell you most truly, you shall see heaven opened and the angels
of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.




CHAPTER III. CHRIST CHANGING WATER INTO WINE, RESIDING AT CAPERNAUM, AND PURIFYING THE TEMPLE.


1 [2:1]AND on the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and
the mother of Jesus was there; [2:2]and Jesus also was invited, and his
disciples, to the wedding. [2:3]And the wine falling short the mother
of Jesus said to him, They have no wine.  [2:4]Jesus said to her, What
have you to do with me, woman? My hour has not yet come. [2:5]His
mother said to the servants, Do whatever he tells you. [2:6]And there
were six stone water jars there, placed for the purification of the
Jews, containing two or three metretes [16.75 or 25.125 gallons] each.
[2:7]Jesus said to them, Fill the water jars with water; and they
filled them to the top. [2:8]And he said to them, Now draw out and bear
to the master of the feast; and they bore it. [2:9]And when the master
of the feast tasted of the water made wine, and knew not whence it
was,--but the servants knew who had drawn the water,--the master of the
feast called the bridegroom [2:10]and said to him, Every man first
presents the good wine, and when they have drunk freely, the poorer;
but you have kept the good wine till now.  [2:11]This first miracle did
Jesus perform at Cana in Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his
disciples believed on him.  [2:12]After this he went down to Capernaum,
he and his mother, and his brothers, and his disciples, and remained
there a few days.

2 [2:13]And the passover of the Jews was nigh; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. [2:14]And he found in the temple those that sold cattle, and
sheep, and doves, and the brokers sitting; [2:15]and making a whip of
cords he drove them all out of the temple, also the sheep and cattle,
and poured out the money of the brokers, and overturned the tables,
[2:16]and said to those that sold doves, Take these things hence; make
not my Father's house a house of merchandise. [2:17]And his disciples
remembered that it was written, The zeal of thy house consumes me.

3 [2:18]Then the Jews answered and said to him, What sign do you show
us, that you do these things? [2:19]Jesus answered and said to them,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it.  [2:20]Then the
Jews said to him, Forty-six years was this temple being built, and will
you raise it in three days? [2:21]But he spoke of the temple of his
body. [2:22]When, therefore, he was raised from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he said this, and they believed the Scripture and the
word which Jesus spoke.




CHAPTER IV. CHRIST'S DISCOURSE WITH NICODEMUS.


1 [2:23]AND when he was at Jerusalem at the feast of the passover many
believed on him, seeing his miracles which he performed; [2:24]but
Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men, [2:25]for
he had no need that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in
man.

2 [3:1]And there was a man of the Pharisees whose name was Nicodemus, a
ruler of the Jews. [3:2]This man came to him by night and said to him,
Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can
perform these miracles which you perform unless God is with him.
[3:3]Jesus answered and said to him, I tell you most truly, unless one
has been born again he cannot see the kingdom of God. [3:4]Nicodemus
said to him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he become an
unborn infant of his mother a second time, and be born? [3:5]Jesus
answered, I tell you most truly, unless a man is born of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. [3:6]That which is
born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is a
spirit.  [3:7]Wonder not that I said to you, You must be born again.
[3:8]The Spirit breathes where it wills, and you hear its voice, but
you know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so is every one that
has been born of the Spirit.

3 [3:9]Nicodemus answered and said to him, How can these things be?
[3:10] Jesus answered and said to him, Are you a teacher of Israel and
know not these things? [3:11]I tell you most truly, that we speak what
we know, and what we have seen we testify; and you receive not our
testimony. [3:12]If I have told you earthly things and you believe not,
how will you believe if I should tell you heavenly things? [3:13]And no
one has ascended into heaven but he that came down from heaven, the Son
of man who is in heaven. [3:14]And as Moses lifted up the serpent in
the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up; [3:15]that every
one believing in him may have eternal life. [3:16]For God so loved the
world that he gave his only Son, that every one believing in him may
not perish but have eternal life. [3:17]For God sent not his Son into
the world to judge the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. [3:18]He that believes in him is not judged; but he that
believes not has been judged already; because he has not believed in
the name of the only Son of God. [3:19]And this is the judgment; that
the light has come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than
the light, because their deeds are evil. [3:20]For every one that does
evil hates the light, and comes not to the light, lest his deeds should
be reproved; [3:21]but he that does good comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, for they are wrought in God.




CHAPTER V. CHRIST BAPTIZING, AND PREACHING TO THE SAMARITANS.


1 [3:22]AFTER these things Jesus and his disciples came into the
country of Judea; and there he staid with them, and baptized.
[3:23]And John also was baptizing at AEnon, near Salim, because there
were many waters there; and they came and were baptized, [3:24]for John
was not yet cast into prison. [3:25] Then there was a controversy of
the disciples of John with a Jew concerning purification. [3:26]And
they came to John and said to him, Rabbi, he that was with you beyond
the Jordan, to whom you testified, behold, this [man] baptizes and all
men come to him. [3:27]John answered and said, A man can receive
nothing unless it is given him from heaven. [3:28]You yourselves bear
me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but am sent before him.
[3:29]He that has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the
bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly at the
bridegroom's voice; this my joy, therefore, is fully attained.
[3:30]He must increase, but I must decrease. [3:31]He that comes from
above is above all; he that is of the earth is of the earth, and speaks
of the earth. He that comes from heaven is above all; [3:32] and what
he has seen and heard this he testifies; and no one receives his
testimony. [3:33]He that receives his testimony has sealed that God is
true. [3:34]For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for God
gives not the Spirit by measure.  [3:35]The Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand. [3:36]He that believes on the Son
has eternal life; but he that disbelieves the Son shall not see life,
but the wrath of God continues on him.

2 [4:1]When, therefore, the Lord knew that the Pharisees heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, [4:2]though Jesus
himself indeed baptized not, but his disciples, [4:3]he left Judea and
departed again to Galilee. [4:4]And it was necessary that he should
pass through Samaria. [4:5] He came, therefore, to a city of Samaria
called Sychar, near the lot which Jacob gave his son Joseph. [4:6]And
Jacob's well was there.  Jesus, therefore, being fatigued with
travelling sat thus by the well; it was about the sixth hour [noon].
[4:7]A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, Give me
a drink; [4:8]for his disciples had gone away into the city to buy
provisions.  [4:9]Then the Samaritan woman said to him, How do you,
being a Jew, ask a drink of me, who am a Samaritan? for the Jews do no
business with the Samaritans. [4:10]Jesus answered and said to her, If
you knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to you, Give me a
drink, you would have asked him, and he would have given you living
water. [4:11]The woman said to him, Sir, you have nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep; whence then have you the living water? [4:12]Are
you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and who drank
of it himself, and his sons, and his cattle? [4:13]Jesus answered and
said to her, Every one that drinks of this water will thirst again;
[4:14]but whoever drinks of the water which I will give him shall never
thirst; but the water which I will give him shall be in him a fountain
of water springing up to eternal life. [4:15]The woman said to him,
Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, nor come here to draw.
[4:16]He said to her, Go and call your husband, and come here.
[4:17]The woman answered and said, I have no husband.  Jesus said to
her, You have said well, I have no husband; [4:18]for you have had five
husbands, and he whom you now have is not your husband. In this you
have spoken truly.

3 [4:19]The woman said to him, Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet.
[4:20] Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and you say that
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.  [4:21]Jesus said to
her, Believe me, woman, the hour comes, when neither in this mountain,
nor in Jerusalem, you shall worship the Father. [4:22]You worship what
you know not; we worship what we know; for salvation is of the Jews.
[4:23]But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him.  [4:24]God is a Spirit, and those that worship him must
worship in spirit and truth. [4:25]The woman said to him, I know that
the Messiah is coming, called Christ; when he comes he will tell us all
things. [4:26]Jesus said to her, I that speak to you am [the Messiah].

4 [4:27]And upon this his disciples came, and wondered that he talked
with the woman; but no one said to him, What do you seek?  or why do
you talk with her? [4:28]Then the woman left her bucket, and went to
the city, and said to the men, [4:29]Come and see a man who has told me
all things which I have done; is this the Christ? [4:30]They came out
from the city and came to him.

5 [4:31]In the meantime the disciples asked him saying, Rabbi, eat.
[4:32]But he said to them, I have food to eat which you know not of.
[4:33]Then the disciples said one to another, Has any one brought him
food to eat? [4:34]Jesus said to them, My food is to do the will of him
that sent me, and to finish his work. [4:35]Do you not say, There are
yet four months, and the harvest comes?  behold, I say to you, lift up
your eyes and see the fields; for they are white for a harvest.
[4:36]Already he that reaps receives wages and gathers fruit for life
eternal, that he that sows and he that reaps may rejoice together.
[4:37] For in this is the saying true; He that sows is one, and he that
reaps is another. [4:38]I have sent you to reap that on which you have
not labored; others have labored and you have entered into their labor.

6 [4:39]And many of the Samaritans in that city believed on him, on
account of the word of the woman, testifying, He told me all things
which I have done. [4:40]When, therefore, the Samaritans came to him,
they desired him to remain with them; and he remained there two days.
[4:41]And many more believed on account of his word, [4:42]and said to
the woman, We no longer believe on account of your report, for we have
heard him ourselves, and know that this is truly the Saviour of the
world.




CHAPTER VI. CHRIST IN GALILEE, CURING A NOBLEMAN'S SON.


1 [4:43]AND after two days he departed thence to Galilee.  [4:44]For
Jesus himself testified that a prophet is without honor in his native
country. [4:45] When, therefore, he came into Galilee, the Galileans
received him, having seen all that he did at Jerusalem at the feast;
for they also came to the feast.  [4:46]Then he came again to Cana in
Galilee, where he had made the water wine.

2 And there was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum.
[4:47] Hearing that Jesus had come from Judea into Galilee, he went to
him, and desired him to come down and cure his son, for he was about to
die. [4:48]Then Jesus said to him, Unless you see miracles and
prodigies you will not believe.  [4:49] The nobleman said to him, Lord,
come down before my child dies. [4:50]Jesus said to him, Go; your son
lives. The man believed the word which Jesus said to him, and went.
[4:51]And as he was now going down his servants met him, and told,
saying, Your child lives. [4:52]Then he inquired of them the hour in
which he became better. Then they said to him, The fever left him
yesterday, at the seventh hour. [4:53]Then the father knew that it was
in that hour in which Jesus said to him, Your son lives; and he
believed, and all his house. [4:54] This second miracle did Jesus,
having come from Judea into Galilee.




CHAPTER VII. CHRIST CURING A SICK MAN ON THE SABBATH, AT JERUSALEM.


1 [5:1]AFTER these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem. [5:2]And there is at Jerusalem, by the sheep-gate, a
pool, called in Hebrew, Bethesda, having five porches. [5:3]In these
lay a multitude of sick, blind, lame, withered. [5:5]And there was a
certain man there who had been sick thirty-eight years. [5:6]Jesus
seeing him lying, and knowing that he had now been sick a long time,
said to him, Do you wish to become well? [5:7]The sick man answered
him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is disturbed, to put me into
the pool; but while I am coming another goes down before me. [5:8]Jesus
said to him, Arise, take up your bed and walk. [5:9]And the man
immediately became well, and took up his bed and walked. That day was
the sabbath.

2 [5:10]The Jews, therefore, said to him that was cured, It is the
sabbath; it is not lawful for you to carry the bed. [5:11]He answered
them, He that made me well, he said to me, Take up your bed and walk.
[5:12]They asked him, Who is the man that said to you, Take up your bed
and walk? [5:13]And the sick man knew not who it was; for Jesus had
gone away, a multitude being in that place. [5:14]Afterwards Jesus
found him in the temple, and said to him, Behold, you have become well;
sin no more, lest a worse thing happen to you. [5:15]The man went away
and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well; [5:16]and on
this account the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he had done these
things on the sabbath. [5:17]But Jesus answered them, My Father works
even till now, and I work. [5:18]Then, for this reason, the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he not only broke the sabbath but also
said, that God was his Father, making himself equal with God.
[5:19]Then Jesus answered and said to them, I tell you most truly, the
Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for
whatever he does, these things also does the Son in like manner.
[5:20]For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things which he
does; and greater works than these will he show him, that you may
wonder. [5:21]For as the Father raises the dead, and makes them alive,
so also the Son makes alive whom he will. [5:22]For the Father judges
no man, but has given all judgment to the Son, [5:23]that all should
honor the Son as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son
honors not the Father that sent him.

3 [5:24]I tell you most truly, he that hears my word and believes him
that sent me has eternal life, and comes not into judgment, but has
passed from death to life. [5:25]I tell you most truly, that the hour
comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and those that hear shall live.  [5:26]For as the Father has life
in himself, so has he also given to the Son to have life in himself;
[5:27]and has given him authority and judgment to execute, because he
is the Son of man.  [5:28]Wonder not at this; for the hour comes in
which all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice [5:29]and shall
come forth; those that have done good to a resurrection of life, and
those that have done evil to a resurrection of judgment. [5:30]I can do
nothing of myself; as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, for I
seek not my will, but the will of him that sent me.

4 [5:31]If I testify of myself my testimony is not true.  [5:32]There
is another who testifies of me, and I know that the testimony which he
testifies of me is true. [5:33]You sent to John, and he testified to
the truth; [5:34]but I receive not testimony from a man; but I say
these things that you may be saved. [5:35]He was a burning and shining
light, and you were willing for a time to rejoice in his light.
[5:36]But I have greater testimony than John's; for the works which the
Father has given me to finish, these works which I do, testify of me
that the Father has sent me; [5:37]and the Father who sent me, he has
testified of me. You have not heard his voice at any time, nor seen his
form; [5:38]and his word you have not continuing in you, for whom he
has sent, him you believe not. [5:39]You search the Scriptures, because
you think by them to have eternal life; and they testify of me;
[5:40]and you will not come to me that you may have life.

5 [5:41]I receive not glory from men, [5:42]but I know you, that you
have not the love of God in you. [5:43]I have come in my Father's name
and you receive me not; if another comes in his own name, him will you
receive. [5:44]How can you believe, receiving glory one from another,
and the glory from God alone you seek not? [5:45]Think not that I will
accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuses you, Moses, in whom
you trust. [5:46]For if you had believed Moses, you would have believed
me; for he wrote of me. [5:47]But if you believe not his writings, how
will you believe my words?




CHAPTER VIII. CHRIST FEEDING FIVE THOUSAND, AND WALKING ON THE LAKE.

1 [6:1]AFTER these things Jesus went across the lake of Galilee, the
Tiberias. [6:2]And a great multitude followed him, because they saw the
miracles which he performed on the sick. [6:3]And Jesus went up on the
mountain and sat there with his disciples.  [6:4]And the passover was
nigh, the feast of the Jews. [6:5]Then Jesus lining up his eyes, and
seeing many people come to him, said to Philip, Whence shall we buy
bread that these may eat?

2 [6:6]But this he said to try him; for he knew what he was about to
do. [6:7] Philip answered him, Two hundred denarii [$28] worth of bread
is not sufficient for them, that each may take a little.  [6:8]One of
his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to him, [6:9]There
is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fishes; but what are
these for so many? [6:10]Jesus said, Make the men sit down. And there
was much grass in the place. The men, therefore, sat down in number
about five thousand. [6:11]Then Jesus took the bread, and having given
thanks, distributed it to those reclining; likewise also of the fishes,
as much as they wished. [6:12]And when they were filled he said to his
disciples, Collect the fragments that remain over, that nothing may be
lost.  [6:13]Then they collected, and filled twelve traveling-baskets
with the fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over to
those who had eaten.

3 [6:14]Then the men, seeing what a miracle Jesus had performed, said,
This is truly the prophet who was to come into the world.  [6:15]And
Jesus knowing that they were about to come and take him by force to
make him a king, went up to the mountain himself alone.

4 [6:16]And when it was evening, his disciples went down to the lake,
[6:17] and entering into the ship were crossing the lake to Capernaum.
And it was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them, [6:18]and the lake
was made rough by a great wind blowing.  [6:19]Then having gone about
twenty-five or thirty stadiums [3 or 3 1-2 miles], they saw Jesus
walking on the lake and coming near the ship, and they were afraid.
[6:20]But he said to them, It is I; be not afraid. [6:21] Then they
willingly took him into the ship, and immediately the ship was at the
land to which they were going.




CHAPTER IX. CHRIST AT CAPERNAUM PROCLAIMING HIMSELF THE SON OF GOD AND THE BREAD OF LIFE.


1 [6:22]ON the next day, the multitude standing on the other side of
the lake seeing that there was no other boat there except one, and that
Jesus entered not into the ship with his disciples but his disciples
had gone away alone,-- [6:23] but other boats came from Tiberias near
the place where they had eaten bread after the Lord gave thanks,--
[6:24]when, therefore, the multitude saw that Jesus was not there,
neither his disciples, they went into the ships and came to Capernaum,
seeking Jesus. [6:25]And finding him on the other side of the lake they
said to him, Rabbi, when came you hither? [6:26]Jesus answered them and
said, I tell you most truly, you seek me not because you saw miracles,
but because you eat of the bread and were filled. [6:27]Work not for
the food which perishes, but for the food which endures to eternal
life, which the Son of man will give you; for him has God the Father
sealed.

2 [6:28]Then they said to him, What shall we do to perform the works of
God? [6:29]Jesus answered and said to them, This is the work of God; to
believe on him whom he has sent. [6:30]Then they said to him, What
miracle do you perform, that we may see and believe you? what work do
you perform? [6:31]Our fathers eat the manna in the wilderness, as it
is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. [6:32]Then Jesus
said to them, I tell you most truly, Moses gave you not bread from
heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven; [6:33]for
the bread of God is he that comes down from heaven and gives life to
the world.

3 [6:34]Then they said to him, Sir, always give us this bread.
[6:35]Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life; he that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst.
[6:36]But I said to you, that you have seen me and believe not.
[6:37]Every thing which the Father gives to me shall come to me, and
him that comes to me I will by no means cast out; [6:38]for I came down
from heaven not to do my will, but the will of him that sent me.
[6:39]And this is the will of him that sent me; that I should lose
nothing of all that he has given me, but should raise it up at the last
day. [6:40]For this is the will of my Father, that every one who sees
the Son and believes in him should have eternal life; and I will raise
him up at the last day.

4 [6:41]Then the Jews complained of him because he said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven. [6:42]And they said, Is not this Jesus,
the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?  how, then, does he
say, I came down from heaven? [6:43]Then Jesus answered and said to
them, Complain not among yourselves.  [6:44]No one can come to me
unless the Father who sent me shall draw him; and I will raise him up
at the last day. [6:45]It is written in the prophets, And all shall be
taught of God. Every one who has heard and learned of the Father comes
to me.  [6:46]Not that any one has seen the Father except he that is
from God; he has seen the Father.

5 [6:47]I tell you most truly, He that believes has eternal life.
[6:48]I am the bread of life. [6:49]Your fathers eat manna in the
wilderness, and died; [6:50]this is the bread which comes down from
heaven, that one may eat of it and not die. [6:51]I am the living bread
which came down from heaven; if any one eats of this bread, he shall
live forever; and the bread which I will give for the life of the world
is my flesh.

6 [6:52]Then the Jews contended one with another, saying, How can this
man give us his flesh to eat? [6:53]Then Jesus said to them, I tell you
most truly, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, you have no life in you. [6:54]He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
[6:55]For my flesh is the true food, and my blood is the true drink.
[6:56]He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood continues in me, and I
in him. [6:57]As the living Father sent me and I live by the Father, so
he that eats me shall live by me. [6:58]This is the bread which came
down from heaven; not as your fathers eat and died, he that eats this
bread shall live forever. [6:59]These things he said in a synagogue,
teaching in Capernaum.

7 [6:60]Then many of his disciples hearing him said, This is a hard
saying; who can hear him? [6:61]And Jesus knowing in himself that his
disciples complained of this, said to them, Does this offend you?
[6:62][What], then if you should see the Son of man ascend where he was
formerly? [6:63]The Spirit is that which makes alive; the flesh profits
nothing; the words which I have spoken to you are spirit and life.
[6:64]But there are some of you who believe not. For Jesus knew from
the beginning who they were that believed not, and who he was that
would betray him.  [6:65]And on that account he said, I told you that
no one can come to me unless it has been given him by my Father.

8 [6:66]From this time many of his disciples went away from following
him, and walked no more with him. [6:67]Then Jesus said to the twelve
Will you also go away? [6:68]Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom
shall we go? you have words of eternal life, [6:69]and we have believed
and know that you are the Holy [Son] of God. [6:70]He answered them,
Have I not chosen you twelve? and of you one is a devil. [6:71]But he
spoke of Judas the son of Simon Iscariot, for he was about to betray
him, being one of the twelve. [7:1]And after these things Jesus walked
in Galilee, for he would not walk in Judea because the Jews sought to
kill him.




CHAPTER X. CHRIST AT THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES.


1 [7:2]AND the feast of the Jews was nigh, the feast of tabernacles.
[7:3]Then his brothers said to him, Go down from here, and go into
Judea, that your disciples also may see your works which you do;
[7:4]for no one does any thing in secret, and seeks himself to be in
public. If you do these things, show yourself to the world. [7:5]For
his brothers did not believe on him. [7:6]Then Jesus said to them, My
time has not yet come, but your time is always ready. [7:7]The world
cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it that its
works are evil.  [7:8]Do you go up to the feast; I go not up to this
feast, because my time has not yet fully come. [7:9]Having said these
things he continued in Galilee.

2 [7:10]But when his brothers had gone up, then he also went up to the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. [7:11]Then the Jews sought
him at the feast, and said, Where is he?  [7:12]And there was much
complaining concerning him among the multitude; some said, He is a good
man; others said, No; but he deceives the people. [7:13]Nevertheless,
no one spoke openly for him from fear of the Jews.

3 [7:14]And in the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and
taught. [7:15]Then the Jews wondered, saying, How does this man know
letters, not having learned? [7:16]Then Jesus answered them and said,
My teaching is not mine but his that sent me. [7:17]If any one will do
his will, he shall know of the teaching whether it is from God or
whether I speak from myself.  [7:18]He that speaks from himself seeks
his own glory; but he that seeks the glory of him that sent him, this
[man] is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. [7:19]Did not Moses
give you the law? and no one of you performs the law. Why do you seek
to kill me? [7:20]The multitude answered, You have a demon; who seeks
to kill you? [7:21]Jesus answered and said to them, I performed one
work and you all wonder. [7:22]Moses gave you circumcision, not that it
is of Moses but of the fathers, and you circumcise a man on the
sabbath. [7:23]If a man receives circumcision on the sabbath, that the
law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because I made a
man entirely sound on the sabbath? [7:24]Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge a righteous judgment.

4 [7:25]Then some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem said, Is not this he
whom they seek to kill? [7:26]And behold, he speaks boldly, and they
say nothing to him. Have the rulers at length learned that this is the
Christ? [7:27]But we know this man whence he is; but when the Christ
comes, no one knows whence he is. [7:28]Then Jesus cried, teaching in
the temple and saying, You both know me and know whence I am; and I
have not come of myself; but he that sent me is true, whom you know
not; [7:29]I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.
[7:30]Then they sought to take him by force; but no man laid a hand on
him, for his hour had not yet come.

5 [7:31]And many of the multitude believed on him, and said, When the
Christ comes will he perform more miracles than this man has performed?
[7:32]The Pharisees heard the multitude saying these things concerning
him, and the chief priests and Pharisees sent to take him by force.
[7:33]Then Jesus said, Yet a little while am I with you, and I go to
him that sent me. [7:34]You shall seek and shall not find, and where I
am you cannot come. [7:35]Then the Jews said one to another, Where is
this man about to go, that we shall not find him? Will he go to the
dispersion of the Greeks, and teach the Greeks? [7:36]What does the
word which he said mean; You shall seek and shall not find me, and
where I am you cannot come?

6 [7:37]And on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any one thirsts, let him come to me and drink.
[7:38]He that believes in me, as the Scripture has said, out of him
shall flow rivers of living water. [7:39]But he said this of the Spirit
which those believing in him were about to receive; for the Spirit was
not yet [given], because Jesus was not yet glorified. [7:40]Then some
of the multitude hearing these words, said, This is truly the prophet;
[7:41]others said, This is the Christ; others said, [No]; for does the
Christ come from Galilee? [7:42]Has not the Scripture said that the
Christ comes from the offspring of David, and from Bethlehem, the
village where David was? [7:43]Then there was a division among the
multitude on his account; [7:44]and some of them wished to take him by
force, but no one laid hands on him.

7 [7:45]Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees, and
they said to them, Why have you not brought him?  [7:46]The officers
answered, A man never spoke thus. [7:47]The Pharisees answered them,
Are you also deceived? [7:48]Has any one of the rulers believed on him,
or of the Pharisees? [7:49] But this multitude which know not the law
are accursed.  [7:50]Nicodemus, he that came to him, being one of them,
said to them, [7:51]Does our law judge a man unless it first hears from
him and knows what he does? [7:52]They answered and said to him, Are
you also from Galilee? search and see; for no prophet is raised up from
Galilee.

8 [7:53][An early interpolation, but probably true]. And every man went
to his own house; [8:1]and Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. [8:2]And
in the morning he went again to the temple, and all the people came to
him, and he sat and taught them. [8:3]And the scribes and Pharisees
brought him a woman taken in adultery, and placing her in the midst
[8:4]said to him, Teacher, this woman was taken in adultery, in the
very act. [8:5]In the law, Moses commanded us that such should be
stoned; what therefore do you say? [8:6]They said this to try him, that
they might have something of which to accuse him. But Jesus, stooping
down, wrote with his finger on the ground. [8:7]And when they continued
asking him, rising up, he said to them, Let him that has not sinned
among you first cast the stone at her. [8:8]And again stooping down he
wrote on the ground. [8:9]But they hearing, and being convicted by
their consciences, went out, one by one, beginning with the oldest,
even to the last; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in
the midst. [8:10]And Jesus rising up and seeing no one but the woman,
said to her, Woman, where are those your accusers? Has no man condemned
you?  [8:11]And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said to her, Neither
do I condemn you; go, and sin no more.




CHAPTER XI. CHRIST DECLARING HIMSELF THE SON OF GOD.


1 [8:12]THEN Jesus spoke to them again, saying, I am the light of the
world; he that follows me shall not walk in darkness but shall have the
light of life. [8:13]Then the Pharisees said to him, You testify of
yourself; your testimony is not true.  [8:14]Jesus answered and said to
them, Even if I testify of myself, my testimony is true, for I know
whence I came and whither I go; but you know not whence I come or
whither I go.  [8:15]You judge according to the flesh; I judge no one;
[8:16]and even if I judge, my judgment is true, because I am not alone,
but I and the Father who sent me. [8:17]And it is written also in your
law, that the testimony of two men is true; [8:18]I am one, testifying
of myself, and the Father who sent me testifies of me.  [8:19]Then they
said to him, Where is your Father? Jesus answered, You have neither
known me nor my Father; if you had known me you would also have known
my Father. [8:20]These words he said in the treasury, teaching in the
temple; and no one took him by force, for his hour had not yet come.

2 [8:21]Then Jesus said to them again, I go away, and you shall seek me
and die in your sin; where I go, you cannot come.  [8:22]Then the Jews
said, Will he kill himself, that he says, Where I go you cannot come?
[8:23]And he said to them, You are from below; I am from above; you are
from this world; I am not from this world. [8:24]Therefore I said to
you, You shall die in your sins; for if you believe not that I am [the
Christ], you shall die in your sins. [8:25] Then they said to him, Who
are you? And Jesus said to them, What at the beginning, and what I tell
you [now]. [8:26]I have many things to say and judge of you; but he
that sent me is true; and what I have heard from him, these things I
speak in the world. [8:27]They understood not that he spoke to them of
the Father. [8:28]Then Jesus said to them, When you shall lift up the
Son of man, then shall you know that I am [the Christ]; and I do
nothing of myself; but I speak these things as the Father has taught
me; [8:29]and he having sent me is with me, he has not left me alone,
for I always do the things which please him.

3 [8:30]When he said these things many believed on him.  [8:31]Then
Jesus said to the Jews who believed on him, If you continue in my word,
you are my disciples indeed; [8:32]and you shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free.  [8:33]They answered him, We are
children of Abraham, and were never in servitude to any one; how say
you, You shall become free? [8:34]Jesus answered them, I tell you most
truly, that every one who commits sin is a servant of the sin.
[8:35]But the servant continues not in the house for ever; the Son
continues for ever. [8:36]If, therefore, the Son shall make you free,
you shall be free indeed. [8:37]I know that you are children of
Abraham; but you seek to kill me because my word has no place in you.
[8:38]What I have seen with my Father I speak, and you also do what you
have heard from your father. [8:39]They answered and said to him, Our
father is Abraham. Jesus said to them, If you were children of Abraham,
you would have done the works of Abraham; [8:40]but now you seek to
kill me, a man who has told you the truth, which I have heard from God;
Abraham did not do this. [8:41]You do the works of your father. They
said to him, We were not born by fornication, we have one father, God.
[8:42]Jesus said to them, If God was your father you would have loved
me; for I came forth and come from God; for I came not of myself, but
he sent me. [8:43]Why do you not understand my speech? because you
cannot hear my word. [8:44]You are of your father the devil, and the
desires of your father you will to do.  He was a murderer from the
beginning and stood not by the truth; for truth is not in him. When he
speaks a lie, he speaks from his own; for he is a liar, and the father
of him [that lies].  [8:45]But because I tell you the truth you believe
me not.  [8:46]Who of you convicts me of a sin? If I say the truth, why
do you not believe me? [8:47]He that is of God hears the words of God;
you, therefore, hear not, because you are not of God.

4 [8:48]The Jews answered and said to him, Say we not well that you are
a Samaritan, and have a demon? [8:49]Jesus answered, I have not a
demon; but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.  [8:50]But I seek
not my glory; there is one that seeks and judges. [8:51]I tell you most
truly, if any one shall keep my word he shall never see death.
[8:52]The Jews said to him, Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham
died, and the prophets; and you say, If any one shall keep my word he
shall never taste death. [8:53]Are you greater than our father Abraham,
who died?  and the prophets died; whom do you make yourself? [8:54]
Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing; it is my
Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, He is our God; [8:55]and you
have not known him, but I have known him; and if I should say I do not
know him, I should be a liar like you; but I know him and keep his
word. [8:56]Abraham your father rejoiced to see my day, and he saw, and
was glad. [8:57]Then the Jews said to him, You have not yet fifty
years, and have you seen Abraham?  [8:58]Jesus said to them, I tell you
most truly, that before Abraham existed, I am. [8:59]Then they took up
stones to cast at him; but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the
temple.




CHAPTER XII. CHRIST CURING A MAN BORN BLIND, AND HIS PARABLE OF THE GOOD SHEPHERD.


1 [9:1]AND passing by he saw a man that was blind from birth; [9:2]and
his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his
parents, that he was born blind? [9:3]Jesus answered, Neither did this
man sin, nor his parents, but that the works of God might appear in
him. [9:4]I must perform the works of him that sent me, while it is
day; night comes when no man can work.  [9:5]While I am in the world I
am the light of the world.  [9:6]Saying these things he spit on the
ground, and made a paste of the spittle, and put the paste on his eyes,
[9:7]and said to him, Go, and wash in the pool of the Siloam; which is
interpreted, Sent. Then he went away and washed, and came seeing.

2 [9:8]Then the neighbors and those who had seen him before, because he
was a beggar, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? [9:9]Some said,
This is he; others said, No, but he is like him; he said, I am he.
[9:10]Then they said to him, How then were your eyes opened? [9:11]He
answered, A man called Jesus made paste and anointed my eyes, and said
to me, Go to the Siloam and wash; then I went and washed, and obtained
sight. [9:12]They said to him, Where is he? He said, I know not.

3 [9:13]They brought to the Pharisees him that was formerly blind;
[9:14]and it was on the sabbath when Jesus made the paste and opened
his eyes. [9:15]Then the Pharisees also asked him again how he obtained
sight. And he said to them, He put a paste on my eyes, and I washed,
and see. [9:16]Then some of the Pharisees said, This man is not of God,
for he does not keep the sabbath. Others said, How can a sinful man
perform such miracles?  And there was a division among them. [9:17]They
said to the blind man again, What do you say of him, because he opened
your eyes?  And he said, He is a prophet.

4 [9:18]Then the Jews did not believe of him that he had been blind and
received his sight, till they called the parents of him that had
received his sight. [9:19]And they asked them, saying, Is this your
son, of whom you say that he was born blind? How then does he now see?
[9:20]His parents answered and said, We know that this is our son, and
that he was born blind; [9:21]but how he now sees we know not, or who
has opened his eyes we know not; ask him, he is of age, he will speak
for himself. [9:22]His parents said these things because they feared
the Jews; for already the Jews had agreed that if any one confessed him
to be Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue; [9:23] therefore
his parents said, He is of age, ask him.

5 [9:24]Then they called the man who had been blind, a second time, and
said to him, Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.
[9:25]Then he answered, Whether he is a sinner I know not; one thing I
know, that having been blind, I now see.  [9:26]Then they said to him,
What did he do to you? how did he open your eyes? [9:27]He answered
them, I have told you already, and you did not hear; why do you wish to
hear again? Do you also wish to be his disciples? [9:28]They reproached
him, and said, You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.
[9:29]We know that God spoke to Moses, but we know not whence this man
is.  [9:30]The man answered and said to them, It is a strange thing,
that you know not whence he is, and he has opened my eyes.  [9:31]We
know that God hears not sinners; but if one is a worshipper of God, and
does his will, him he hears. [9:32]Since the world began it has not
been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind; [9:33]unless
this man was from God he would have been able to do nothing. [9:34]They
answered and said to him, You were born entirely in sins, and do you
teach us? And they cast him without.

6 [9:35]Jesus heard that they had cast him without, and finding him he
said to him, Do you believe in the Son of God? [9:36]And he answered
and said, Who is he, sir, that I shall believe on him? [9:37]Jesus said
to him, You have both seen him, and he that speaks to you is he.
[9:38]And he said, Lord, I believe, and worshipped him. [9:39]And Jesus
said, I came into this world for judgment, that those not seeing may
see, and those seeing become blind.

7 [9:40]And the Pharisees who were with him heard these things and said
to him, Are we also blind? [9:41]Jesus said to them, If you were blind
you would not have had sin; but now you say, We see, your sin remains.
[10:1]I tell you most truly, he that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbs in at some other place, he is a thief and robber;
[10:2]but he that enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
[10:3]To him the gate-keeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and
he calls his sheep by name, and leads them out. [10:4]When he puts out
all his sheep he goes before them, and the sheep follow him; for they
know his voice. [10:5]But a stranger they will not follow, but will
flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers.  [10:6]This
parable spoke Jesus to them, but they knew not what the words which he
spoke to them meant.

8 [10:7]Then said Jesus to them again, I tell you most truly, I am the
door of the sheep. [10:8]All who came before me are thieves and
robbers; but the sheep have not heard them. [10:9]I am the door; by me
if any one enters in he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find
pasturage. [10:10]The thief comes not, except to steal, and kill, and
destroy; I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly.

9 [10:11]I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd gives his life for
the sheep. [10:12]But the hired servant, and one who is not a shepherd,
who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep
and flees, and the wolf seizes and scatters them; [10:13]for he is a
hired servant and cares not for the sheep. [10:14]I am the good
shepherd, and I know mine and mine know me, [10:15]as the Father knows
me and I know the Father; and I give my life for the sheep.

10 [10:16]And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; and them I
must lead, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one flock,
one shepherd. [10:17]Therefore my Father loves me, because I lay down
my life that I may take it again. [10:18]No one takes it from me, but I
lay it down of myself. I have a right to lay it down, and I have a
right to take it again; this commandment have I received from my
Father. [10:19]There was a division again among the Jews on account of
these words; [10:20]and many of them said, He has a demon, and is mad;
why do you hear him? [10:21]Others said, These are not the words of a
demoniac; can a demon open the eyes of the blind?




CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST AT THE FEAST OF THE DEDICATION, AND BEYOND THE JORDAN.


1 [10:22]IT was the dedication at Jerusalem; it was winter; [10:23]and
Jesus walked in the temple, in Solomon's porch.  [10:24]Then the Jews
came around him and said to him, How long do you hold our minds [in
doubt]? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly. [10:25]Jesus answered
them, I have told you and you believe not; the works which I perform in
my Father's name, these testify of me; [10:26]but you believe not,
because you are not of my sheep. As I said to you, [10:27]My sheep hear
my voice and I know them, and they follow me, [10:28]and I give them
eternal life, and they shall never perish nor shall any one pluck them
out of my hand. [10:29]My Father who gave [them] to me is greater than
all, and no one can pluck them out of my Father's hand.  [10:30]I and
the Father are one.

2 [10:31]Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.  [10:32]Jesus
answered them, Many good works have I shown you from the Father; for
which of these works do you stone me? [10:33]The Jews answered him, We
do not stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy, and because you,
being a man, make yourself God.  [10:34]Jesus answered them, Is it not
written in your law, I said you are gods? [10:35]If he called them gods
to whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken,
[10:36]do you tell him whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the
world, You blaspheme, because I said, I am the Son of God? [10:37]If I
do not my Father's works, believe me not; [10:38]but if I do, though
you believe not me, believe the works, that you may know and understand
that the Father is in me and I in the Father.  [10:39]Then they sought
again to take him by force; and he escaped out of their hand.

3 [10:40]And he went away again beyond the Jordan to the place where
John first baptized, and continued there. [10:41]And many came to him
and said, John performed no miracle, but all things which John said of
this man were true. [10:42]And many believed on him there.




CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST RAISING LAZARUS FROM THE DEAD.


1 [11:1]A CERTAIN man was sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of
Mary and Martha her sister. [11:2]It was the Mary who anointed the Lord
with ointment and wiped his feet with her hairs, whose brother Lazarus
was sick. [11:3]Then the sisters sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he
whom you love is sick.  [11:4] But Jesus hearing it said, This sickness
is not to death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be
glorified by it. [11:5]And Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and
Lazarus.  [11:6]When, therefore, he heard that he was sick, he
continued in the place where he was two days.

2 [11:7]Then after that he said to the disciples, Let us go again into
Judea. [11:8]The disciples said to him, Rabbi, the Jews lately sought
to stone you, and do you go there again?  [11:9]Jesus answered, Are
there not twelve hours of the day? and if one walks in the day he does
not stumble, because he sees the light of this world; [11:10]but if he
walks in the night he stumbles, because the light is not in it.
[11:11]He said these things, and after this he said to them, Our friend
Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I go that I may awake him. [11:12]Then
they said to him, Lord, if he has fallen asleep he will recover.
[11:13]But Jesus spoke of his death; but they thought that he spoke of
the rest of sleep. [11:14]Then Jesus, therefore, said to them plainly,
Lazarus has died; [11:15]and I am glad for your sakes that I was not
there, that you may believe; but let us go to him. [11:16]Then Thomas,
who is called The twin, said to the fellow disciples, Let us go also,
that we may die with him.

3 [11:17]Then Jesus coming found that he had been four days in the
tomb. [11:18]And Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadiums [1
3-4 miles] distant. [11:19]And many of the Jews came to those with
Martha and Mary, to console them for their brother.  [11:20]Then when
Martha heard that Jesus had come, she went out to meet him; but Mary
sat in the house. [11:21]Then Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had
been here, my brother would not have died; [11:22]but now also I know
that whatever you ask of God, God will give you. [11:23]Jesus said to
her, Your brother shall rise again. [11:24]Martha said to him, I know
that he will rise at the resurrection at the last day. [11:25]Jesus
said to her, I am the resurrection and the life; he that believes in
me, even if he has died, shall live, [11:26]and no one who lives and
believes in me shall ever die; do you believe this? [11:27]She said to
him, Yes, Lord; I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who
comes into the world.

4 [11:28]And having said this she went away and called Mary her sister,
privately, saying, The teacher has come and calls for you. [11:29]When
she heard, she arose quickly and came to him; [11:30]but Jesus had not
yet entered into the village, but was at the place where Martha met
him. [11:31]Then the Jews who were with her in the house and consoling
her, seeing Mary that she arose and went out quickly, followed her,
saying, She goes to the tomb to weep there. [11:32]Then Mary, when she
came where Jesus was, and saw him, fell down at his feet, saying to
him, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not have died.

5 [11:33]Then when Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping who came
with her, he was greatly agitated in spirit and affected, [11:34]and
said, Where have you laid him? They said to him, Lord, come and see.
[11:35]Jesus wept. [11:36]Then the Jews said, Behold, how he loved him.
[11:37]And some of them said, Could not this man who opens the eyes of
the blind, cause that even he should not have died? [11:38]Then Jesus
again being agitated within himself came to the tomb; it was a cave,
and a stone lay upon it. [11:39]Jesus said, Take away the stone.
Martha, the sister of the dead, said to him, Lord, by this time he
smells; for he has been dead four days. [11:40]Jesus said to her, Did I
not tell you that if you will believe you shall see the glory of God?
[11:41] Then they took away the stone. And Jesus lifted his eyes above,
and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me; [11:42]and I
knew that thou hearest me always; but for the sake of the multitude who
stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me.
[11:43]And having said these things, he cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus, come forth. [11:44]And the dead came forth, bound as to his
feet and hands with bandages, and his face was bound with a napkin.
Jesus said to them, Unbind him, and let him go.

6 [11:45]Then many of the Jews who came with Mary, and saw what Jesus
did, believed on him; [11:46]but some of them went away to the
Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.

7 [11:47]Then the chief priests and Pharisees convened the Sanhedrim,
and said, What do we accomplish? for this man performs many miracles.
[11:48]If we leave him thus all will believe on him; and the Romans
will come and take away our place and nation.  [11:49]And one of them,
Caiaphas, being chief priest that year, said to them, You know nothing
at all, [11:50]neither consider that it is expedient for us that one
man should die for the people, and not that all the nation should
perish. [11:51]This he said not of himself, but being chief priest that
year he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation;
[11:52]and not for the nation only, but to bring together into one
[body] all the children of God scattered abroad. [11:53]From that day,
therefore, they took counsel to kill him.

8 [11:54]Then Jesus walked no more openly among the Jews, but went
thence to a region near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim, and
there he staid with his disciples. [11:55]And the passover of the Jews
was nigh, and many went up from the country to Jerusalem, before the
passover, to purify themselves.  [11:56]Then they sought Jesus, and
standing in the temple said one to another, What do you think? that he
will not come to the feast? [11:57]And the chief priests and Pharisees
had given commandment, that if any one knew where he was he should make
it known, that they might take him by force.




CHAPTER XV. CHRIST AT BETHANY, HIS TRIUMPHANT ENTRANCE INTO JERUSALEM, ETC.


1 [12:1]THEN Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethany,
where Lazarus was whom Jesus had raised from the dead.  [12:2]Then they
made him a supper there, and Martha served; but Lazarus was one of
those that reclined with him. [12:3]Then Mary taking a pound of genuine
nard, very costly, anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with
her hairs. And the house was filled with the odor of the ointment.
[12:4]But the Iscariot, one of his disciples, who was about to betray
him, said, [12:5]Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred
denarii [$42], and given to the poor? [12:6]But he said this, not that
he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the
treasure-chest, and carried off the things put in it. [12:7]Then Jesus
said, Let her alone, that she may keep this for the day of preparation
for my burial; [12:8]the poor you always have with you, but me you have
not always.

2 [12:9]A great multitude of the Jews, therefore, knew that he was
there, and came, not on account of Jesus only, but also to see Lazarus
whom he had raised from the dead. [12:10]And the chief priests took
counsel to kill Lazarus also, [12:11]because many of the Jews withdrew
on his account and believed in Jesus.

3 [12:12]On the next day a great multitude having come to the feast,
having heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, [12:13]took branches
of palm trees, and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel! [12:14]And
Jesus finding a young ass sat on it, as it is written; [12:15]Fear not,
Daughter of Zion; behold, your King comes sitting on the colt of an
ass. [12:16]His disciples did not understand these things at first; but
when Jesus was glorified then they remembered that these things were
written of him, and that they had done these things to him.  [12:17]The
multitude, therefore, which was with him, testified that he called
Lazarus from the tomb, and raised him from the dead. [12:18]On this
account also the multitude met him, because they heard that he had
performed this miracle. [12:19]The Pharisees, therefore, said among
themselves, You see that you have gained nothing; behold, the world has
gone after him.  [12:20]And there were some Greeks of those who went up
to Jerusalem to worship at the feast; [12:21]these, therefore, came to
Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir,
we wish to see Jesus. [12:22]Philip went and told Andrew, and again
Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus.  [12:23]And Jesus answered them,
saying, The hour has come that the Son of man should be glorified.
[12:24]I tell you most truly, that unless the kernel of wheat falls
into the earth and dies, it continues alone; but if it dies, it bears
much fruit. [12:25]He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that
hates his life in this world shall preserve it to eternal life.
[12:26]If any man serves me let him follow me; and where I am there
also shall my servant be. If anyone serves me, him will the Father
honor.  [12:27]Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father,
save me from this hour. But for this cause came I to this hour;
[12:28]Father, glorify thy name. Then came a voice from heaven, I have
both glorified and will glorify it again. [12:29]Then the multitude
standing and hearing, said, It was thunder; others said, An angel spoke
to him. [12:30] Jesus answered and said, This voice was not on my
account, but for you. [12:31] There is now a judgment of this world;
the ruler of this world shall now be cast out; [12:32]and if I am
raised on high from the earth I will draw all men to me. [12:33]But
this he said, signifying by what death he was about to die.

5 [12:34]Then the multitude answered him, We have heard from the law
that the Christ continues forever; and how say you, The Son of man must
be raised on high? Who is this Son of man?  [12:35]Then Jesus said to
them, Yet a little while is the light with you; walk while you have the
light, that darkness may not overtake you; for he that walks in
darkness knows not where he goes. [12:36] While you have the light,
believe in the light, that you may be children of light. Jesus said
these things, and went away and concealed himself from them.

6 [12:37]But though he had performed so many miracles before them they
did not believe in him; [12:38]that the word of Isaiah the prophet,
which he spoke, might be fulfilled; Lord, who has believed our report?
and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? [12:39]For this
reason they could not believe, because, Isaiah said again, [12:40]He
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not
see with their eyes and understand with their hearts, and be converted,
and I should cure them. [12:41]Isaiah said these things because he saw
his glory, and spoke of him. [12:42]Nevertheless, many of the rulers
believed on him, but on account of the Pharisees did not confess him,
lest they should be put out of the synagogues; [12:43]for they loved
the glory of men more than the glory of God.

7 [12:44]And Jesus cried and said, He that believes on me, believes not
on me but on him that sent me; [12:45]and he that beholds me beholds
him that sent me. [12:46]I have come a light into the world, that no
one who believes in me should continue in darkness. [12:47]And if any
one hears my words and keeps them not, I do not judge him; for I came
not to judge the world but to save the world. [12:48]He that rejects me
and receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word which I
have spoken, that shall judge him at the last day. [12:49] For I have
not spoken of myself; but the Father who sent me gave me commandment
what to say and what to speak; [12:50]and I know that his commandment
is eternal life. What things I speak, therefore, I so speak as the
Father has told me.




CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST AT THE LAST SUPPER, AND HIS SERMON TO THE ELEVEN. 


1 [13:1]AND before the feast of the passover, Jesus knowing that his
hour had come to depart from this world to the Father, having loved his
own in the world he loved them to the end. [13:2]And supper being over,
the devil having already put it in the heart that Judas Iscariot, the
son of Simon, should betray him, [13:3]he knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, and that he came from God and was
going to God, [13:4]arose from supper, and laid aside his clothes, and
taking a towel girded himself: [13:5]Then he put water into the
wash-basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them
with the towel with which he was girded.

2 [13:6]Then he came to Simon Peter; he said to him, Lord, do you wash
my feet? [13:7]Jesus answered and said to him, What I do you know not
now, but you shall know hereafter. [13:8]Peter said to him, You shall
never by any means wash my feet. He answered him, Unless I wash you you
have no part with me. [13:9]Simon Peter said to him, Lord, not my feet
only, but my hands and my head.  [13:10] Jesus said to him, He that is
washed needs only that his feet should be washed, but is wholly pure;
and you are pure, but not all. [13:11]For he knew him that was to
betray him; therefore, he said, You are not all pure.

3 [13:12]When, therefore, he had washed their feet, and taken his
clothes and sat down again, he said to them, Do you know what I have
done to you? [13:13] You call me Teacher and Lord; and you say well,
for I am. [13:14]If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your
feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.  [13:15]For I have
given you an example, that you also should do as I have done. [13:16]I
tell you most truly, the servant is not greater than his lord, nor the
apostle greater than he that sent him. [13:17]If you know these things,
blessed are you if you do them. [13:18]I speak not of you all; I know
whom I have chosen; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, He that
eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me. [13:19]I tell you
from this time, before it occurs, that when it occurs you may believe
that I am [the Christ]. [13:20]I tell you most truly, He that receives
one that I send receives me; and he that receives me receives him that
sent me.

4 [13:21]Having said these things Jesus was troubled in spirit, and
testified and said, I tell you most truly, that one of you shall betray
me. [13:22]The disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he
spoke. [13:23]One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclining on
the bosom of Jesus. [13:24]Then Simon Peter made signs to this man, and
said to him, Ask who it is of whom he speaks. [13:25]He, falling down
on the breast of Jesus, said to him, Lord, who is it? [13:26]Then Jesus
answered, It is he to whom I will dip and give the mouthful. Then
dipping the mouthful, he took and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon
Iscariot. [13:27]And after the mouthful, then Satan entered into him.
Then Jesus said to him, What you do, do quickly. [13:28]No one of those
reclining knew for what purpose he said this to him, [13:29]for some
thought, since Judas had the treasure-chest, that Jesus said to him,
Buy what we need for the feast; or, that he should give something to
the poor. [13:30]He, therefore, having taken the mouthful, immediately
went out; and it was night.

5 [13:31]When he had gone out Jesus said, Now the Son of man has been
glorified, and God has been glorified in him. [13:32]If God has been
glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and will
immediately glorify him. [13:33]My little children, I am with you yet a
little while. You shall seek me, and as I said to the Jews, Where I go
you cannot come, I now also say to you.  [13:34]I give you a new
commandment to love another, as I have loved you that you also should
love one another. [13:35]By this shall all know that you are my
disciples, if you have love one for another. [13:36]Simon Peter said to
him, Lord, where do you go? Jesus answered Where I go you cannot follow
me now, but you shall follow afterwards. [13:37]Peter said to him,
Lord, why can I not follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.
[13:38]Jesus answered, Will you lay down your life for me? I tell you
most truly, a cock shall not crow till you shall deny me thrice.

6 [14:1]Let not your hearts be troubled; believe in God and believe in
me. [14:2]In my Father's house are many mansions; if there were not I
would have told you. [14:3]For I go to prepare a place for you; and if
I go and shall prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive
you to myself, that where I am you may also be. [14:4]And where I go,
you know the way. [14:5]Thomas said to him, Lord, we know not where you
go, and how do we know the way? [14:6] Jesus said to him, I am the way,
and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except by me.
[14:7]If you had known me you would have known my Father; and from this
time you know him and have seen him.

7 [14:8]Philip said to him, Lord, show us the Father, and we shall be
satisfied. [14:9]Jesus said to him, Have I been so long a time with you
and have you not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the
Father; and how say you, Show us the Father?  [14:10]Do you not believe
that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words which I speak
to you I speak not of myself, but the Father continuing in me, he does
the works. [14:11]Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in
me; but if not, believe on account of the works themselves. [14:12]I
tell you most truly, he that believes on me, the works that I do shall
he do; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go to the
Father; [14:13]and whatever you ask in my name I will do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. [14:14]If you shall ask any thing
in my name, I will do it.

8 [14:15]If you love me, keep my commandments; [14:16]and I will pray
the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, to be with you
forever, [14:17] the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive,
because it beholds it not nor knows it; but you know it, because it
continues with you, and shall be in you.  [14:18]I will not leave you
orphans; I will come to you.  [14:19]Yet a little while and the world
beholds me no more; but you shall behold me; because I live, you shall
live also.  [14:20]In that day you shall know that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you. [14:21]He that has my commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved
by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him.

9 [14:22]Judas said to him, not the Iscariot, Lord, and how is it that
you are about to manifest yourself to us, and not to the world?
[14:23]Jesus answered and said to him, If any one loves me he will keep
my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make
our mansion with him. [14:24]He that loves me not, keeps not my words;
and the word which you hear is not mine, but the Father's that sent me.

10 [14:25]I have said these things to you while yet continuing with
you, [14:26]but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, which the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and remind you of all
things which I have told you. [14:27]Peace I leave with you; my peace I
give you; not as the world gives give I to you. Let not your hearts be
troubled, neither let them be afraid. [14:28]You heard that I said to
you, I will go away and come to you. If you loved me you would rejoice
because I go to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.
[14:29]And now I have told you before it occurs, that when it occurs
you may believe. [14:30]I will not speak with you much more; for the
ruler of this world comes and has nothing in me; [14:31]but [I have
said this] that the world may know that I love the Father, and that as
the Father has commanded me, so I do. Arise, let us go hence.




CHAPTER XVII. CHRIST'S SERMON AFTER THE LAST SUPPER.


1 [15:1]I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
[15:2]Every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away; and every
branch that bears fruit he trims, that it may bear more fruit.
[15:3]You are now pure, by means of the word which I have spoken to
you; [15:4]continue in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear
fruit of itself unless it continues in the vine, so you cannot, unless
you continue in me. [15:5]I am the vine, you are the branches. He that
continues in me and I in him, this man bears much fruit; for separated
from me, you can do nothing.  [15:6]If any one continues not in me he
is cast without as a branch, and is withered; and they collect them and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. [15:7]If you continue in
me, and my words continue in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and
it shall be [given] you. [15:8]By this is my Father glorified, that you
bear much fruit and be my disciples. [15:9]As the Father has loved me,
I also have loved you; continue in my love. [15:10]If you keep my
commandments you shall continue in my love, as I have kept my Father's
commandments and continue in his love. [15:11]I have spoken these
things to you that my joy may be in you, and your joy be completed.
[15:12]This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have
loved you. [15:13]No man has greater love than this, that one should
give his life for his friends.  [15:14]You are my friends if you do
what I command you; [15:15]I no longer call you servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you friends:
for all things which I have heard from my Father I have made known to
you. [15:16]You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
appointed you to go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should
continue, that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give you.
[15:17]These things I charge you, that you love one another.

2 [15:18]If the world hates you, you know that it hated me before you.
[15:19] If you were of this world, the world would be a friend to its
own; but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of
the world, therefore the world hates you.  [15:20]Remember the word
which I said to you, a servant is not greater than his lord. If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my
word, they will also keep yours. [15:21]But all these things they will
do to you, on my account, because they know not him that sent me.
[15:22]If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had
sin; but now they have no pretext for their sin. [15:23]He that hates
me, hates my Father also. [15:24]If I had not done among them the works
which no other one has done, they would not have had sin; but now they
have both seen and hated both me and my Father.  [15:25]But [they do
this] that the word written in their law may be fulfilled, They hated
me without cause. [15:26]But when the Comforter has come, whom I will
send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the
Father, he shall testify of me; [15:27]and you shall also testify,
because you have been with me from the beginning.

3 [16:1]These things I have said to you, that you may not be offended.
[16:2] They shall put you out of the synagogues; but the hour is coming
when every one that kills you will think he renders God a service.
[16:3]And these things they will do, because they have not known the
Father nor me. [16:4]But these things I have told you, that when the
time comes you may remember that I told you of them. But I told you not
these things at the beginning, because I was with you. [16:5]But now I
go to him that sent me, and no one of you asks me, Where do you go?
[16:6]But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled
your hearts. [16:7]But I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you
that I should go away; for if I do not go away, the Comforter will not
come to you; but if I go I will send him to you.  [16:8]And when he has
come, he will convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment: [16:9]of sin, because they believe not on me; [16:10]and of
righteousness, because I go to my Father, and you behold me no more;
[16:11]and of judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.

4 [16:12]I have many things yet to say to you, but you cannot bear them
now; [16:13]but when he, the Spirit of truth has come, he will lead you
in all the truth; for he will not speak of himself, but he will speak
whatever he shall hear, and tell you things to come. [16:14]He shall
glorify me, because he shall receive from me and tell you. [16:15]All
things that the Father has, are mine; on this account I said, He shall
receive of me and tell you.

5 [16:16]A little while and you shall not see me; and again a little
while and you shall see me. [16:17]Then some of his disciples said one
to another, What is this that he says to us, A little while and you
shall not see me, and again a little while and you shall see me? and,
Because I go to the Father?  [16:18]They said therefore, What is this
that he says, The little while? We do not know what he says.

6 [16:19]Jesus knew that they wished to ask him, and said to them, Do
you inquire among yourselves concerning this that I said, A little
while and you shall not see me, and again a little while and you shall
see me? [16:20]I tell you most truly, that you shall weep and lament,
but the world shall rejoice; and you shall be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall become joy. [16:21]For when a woman is in labor she has
pain, because her time has come; but when she has borne the child she
no longer remembers the distress, because of joy that a man is born
into the world.  [16:22]And you therefore now indeed have sorrow; but I
will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no one
shall take from you. [16:23]And in that day you shall ask me nothing; I
tell you most truly, whatever you shall ask the Father, he will give
you in my name. [16:24] Till now you have asked nothing in my name; ask
and you shall receive, that your joy may be complete.

7 [16:25]These things have I spoken to you in parables. The time is
coming when I will no more speak to you in parables, but I will tell
you plainly of the Father. [16:26]In that day you shall ask in my name,
and I tell you not that I will ask the Father for you; [16:27]for the
Father himself is a friend to you, because you have been friends to me,
and believed that I came forth from God. [16:28]I came forth from the
Father and have come into the world; again I leave the world and go to
the Father.

8 [16:29]Then his disciples said to him, Behold, now you speak plainly,
and say no parable; [16:30]now we know that you know all things, and
have no need that any one should ask you; on this account we believe
that you have come forth from God.  [16:31]Jesus answered them, Do you
now believe? [16:32]Behold, the time is coming, and has come, that you
shall be scattered every one to his own, and leave me alone; and I am
not alone, for the Father is with me. [16:33]These things have I told
you, that in me you may have peace. In the world you shall have
affliction; but be of good courage, I have overcome the world.




CHAPTER XVIII. CHRIST'S PRAYER FOR HIS DISCIPLES.


1 [17:1]JESUS spoke these words and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and
said, Father, the hour has come; glorify thy Son, that the Son may
glorify thee, [17:2]as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that
as to all that thou hast given him he should give them eternal life.
[17:3]And this is the eternal life; that they shall know thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. [17:4]I have glorified
thee on the earth; I have finished the work which thou gayest me to do.
[17:5]And now glorify thou me, Father, with thyself, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was.

2 [17:6]I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gayest me out
of the world; they were thine, and thou gavest them me, and they have
kept thy word. [17:7]Now they have known that all things which thou
hast given me are of thee, [17:8]because the words which thou hast
given me I have given them; and they have received and known truly that
I came forth from thee, and believed that thou didst send me. [17:9]I
pray for them. I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou hast
given me, for they are thine, [17:10]and all mine are thine, and thine
mine, and I am glorified in them. [17:11]And I am no longer in the
world, and these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father,
keep in thy name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one as
we also are. [17:12]When I was with them in the world, I kept them in
thy name which thou gayest me, and preserved [them], and no one of them
has been lost, except the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled; [17:13]but now I come to thee, and I say these things in the
world that they may have my joy made complete in them.

3 [17:14]I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them
because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world.  [17:15]I
ask not that thou wouldst take them out of the world, but that thou
wouldst keep them from evil. [17:16]They are not of the world, as I am
not of the world. [17:17]Sanctify them by thy truth; thy word is truth.
[17:18]As thou hast sent me into the world, I also have sent them into
the world: [17:19]and I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be
sanctified by truth.

4 [17:20]And I ask not for these only, but for those also who shall
believe on me through their word, [17:21]that all may be one, as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that
the world may believe that thou hast sent me. [17:22]And the glory
which thou hast given me I have given them, that they may be one as we
are one, [17:23]I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfected
into one, that the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved
them as thou hast loved me. [17:24]Father, what thou hast given me, I
will that they should be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou hast given me; because thou didst love me before the
foundation of the world; [17:25]and, righteous Father, the world has
not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou
didst send me. [17:26]And I have declared to them thy name, and will
declare it, that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them,
as I also am in them.




CHAPTER XIX. THE APPREHENSION OF CHRIST, HIS EXAMINATION BY THE JEWS, PETER'S DENIAL OF HIM.


1 [18:1]JESUS having said these words went out with his disciples
across the brook Cedron, where there was a garden, into which he
entered and his disciples. [18:2]And Judas who betrayed him knew the
place, for Jesus often retired there with his disciples.  [18:3]Then
Judas taking the guard and the officers of the chief priests and
Pharisees, came there with torches, and lamps, and weapons.
[18:4]Jesus, therefore, knowing all things that were coming upon him,
went out and said to them, Whom do you seek?  [18:5]They answered him,
Jesus the Nazoraean. Jesus said to them, I am he. And Judas who
betrayed him stood with them. [18:6]When, therefore, he said to them, I
am he, they went backwards and fell on the ground. [18:7]Then he asked
them again, Whom do you seek?  And they said, Jesus, the Nazoraean.
[18:8]Jesus answered, I told you that I am he; if, therefore, you seek
me, let these go; [18:9]that the word might be fulfilled which he said,
Of those whom thou gayest me I have lost none. [18:10]Then Simon Peter
having a sword drew it and struck the servant of the chief priest, and
cut off his right ear; and the name of the servant was Malchus.
[18:11]Then Jesus said to Peter, Put the sword in the sheath. The cup
which the Father has given me, shall I not drink it?

2 [18:12]Then the guard and the chiliarch and the officers of the Jews
apprehended Jesus, and bound him, [18:13]and led him away to Annas
first; for he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was chief priest that
year; [18:14]and Caiaphas was the one who advised the Jews that it was
expedient that one man should be destroyed for the people.

3 [18:15]But Simon Peter followed Jesus, and the other disciple; and
that disciple was known to the chief priest, and went in with Jesus to
the chief priest's court; [18:16]but Peter stood at the door without.
Then the other disciple who was known to the chief priest went out and
spoke to the door-keeper, and brought in Peter. [18:17]Then the female
servant, the door-keeper, said to Peter, Are you also one of the
disciples of this man? He said, I am not. [18:18]And the servants and
officers having made a fire because it was cold, stood and warmed
themselves. And Peter stood with them and warmed himself.

4 [18:19]Then the chief priest asked Jesus of his disciples, and his
teaching. [18:20]Jesus answered him, I have spoken openly to the world;
I always taught in a synagogue, and in the temple, where the Jews
always assemble, and in secret I have said nothing. [18:21]Why do you
ask me? Ask those who have heard me, what I said to them; behold, they
know what I said. [18:22]He having said these things, one of the
officers who stood by gave Jesus a blow, saying, Do you answer the
chief priest thus?  [18:23]Jesus answered him, If I spoke wrong,
testify of the wrong; but if well, why do you beat me? [18:24]Then
Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the chief priest.

5 [18:25]And Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Then they
said to him, Are you also one of his disciples? He denied, and said, I
am not. [18:26] One of the servants of the chief priest, being a
relation of him whose ear Peter cut off, said, Did I not see you in the
garden with him? [18:27]Then Peter denied again; and immediately a cock
crew.




CHAPTER XX. CHRIST'S TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION BEFORE PILATE.


1 [18:28]THEN they led him from Caiaphas to the Praetorium. And it was
morning; and they entered not into the Praetorium, that they might not
be defiled, but might eat the passover.  [18:29]Then Pilate went out to
them and said, What accusation do you bring against this man?
[18:30]They answered and said to him, If he was not a criminal we
should not have delivered him up to you. [18:31] Then Pilate said to
them, Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law. The
Jews said to him, It is not lawful for us to put any one to death;
[18:32]that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying by what death he was about to die.

2 [18:33]Then Pilate went into the Praetorium and called Jesus, and
said to him, Are you the king of the Jews? [18:34]Jesus answered, Do
you say this of yourself, or did others tell you of me? [18:35]Pilate
answered, Am I a Jew? Your nation and the chief priests have delivered
you to me; what have you done?  [18:36]Jesus answered, My kingdom is
not of this world. If my kingdom had been of this world my officers
would have fought for me, that I should not be given up to the Jews;
but now my kingdom is not here. [18:37]Then Pilate said to him, Are you
a king then?  Jesus answered, As you say, I am a king. For this was I
born, and for this I came into the world, that I should testify to the
truth; every one who is of the truth hears my voice.  [18:38]Pilate
said to him, What is truth? And having said this he went out again to
the Jews, and said to them, I find no fault in him. [18:39]But you have
a custom that I should release one to you at the passover; are you
willing, therefore, that I should release to you the king of the Jews?
[18:40]Then all cried again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. But
Barabbas was a robber.

3 [19:1]Then Pilate took and scourged Jesus. [19:2]And the soldiers
having plaited a crown of thorns put it on his head; and they put a
purple garment about him, [19:3]and came to him and said, Hail, king of
the Jews! And they struck him with the open hand. [19:4]Then Pilate
came out again and said to them, Behold, I bring him out to you, that
you may know that I find no fault in him. [19:5]Then Jesus came out,
wearing the thorny crown and the purple garment. And he said to them,
Behold the man! [19:6]When therefore the chief priests and officers saw
him, they cried, saying, Crucify him! crucify him! Pilate said to them,
Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find no fault in him.
[19:7]The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to
die because he made himself the Son of God.

4 [19:8]When therefore Pilate heard this charge he was more afraid,
[19:9]and entered into the Praetorium again, and said to Jesus, Whence
are you? But Jesus gave him no answer.  [19:10]Pilate said to him, Do
you not speak to me? Do you not know that I have power to release you,
and I have power to crucify you? [19:11]Jesus answered, You would have
had no power against me if it had not been given you from above;
therefore he that delivered me to you has a greater sin.

5 [19:12]From that time Pilate sought to release him; but the Jews
cried, saying, If you release this man you are not a friend of Caesar;
every one who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar. [19:13]Then
Pilate hearing these words led Jesus out, and sat on the tribunal, in a
place called the Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabbatha. [19:14]And it was
the preparation of the passover, it was about the sixth hour [noon];
and he said to the Jews, Behold your king! [19:15]Then they cried out,
Away with him, away with him! crucify him! Pilate said to them, Shall I
crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but
Caesar. [19:16]Then therefore he delivered him to them to be crucified.




CHAPTER XXI. CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION, DEATH, AND BURIAL.


1 [19:17]THEN they took Jesus, and putting the cross on him he went out
to what is called the place of a cranium, which in Hebrew is called
Golgotha, [19:18] where they crucified him, and two others with him,
one on one side and the other on the other, and Jesus between.
[19:19]And Pilate wrote an inscription and put on the cross. And it was
written, JESUS THE NAZORAEAN, THE KING OF THE JEWS. [19:20]Many of the
Jews therefore read this inscription, because the place where Jesus was
crucified was nigh the city; and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and
Greek.  [19:21]Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Write
not, The King of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews.
[19:22]Pilate answered, what I have written I have written.

2 [19:23]Then the soldiers, when they crucified Jesus, took his clothes
and made four parts, a part to each soldier, and his coat. But his coat
was without seam, woven from the top through the whole. [19:24]They
said, therefore, one to another, Let us not divide this, but cast lots
for it whose it shall be; that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which
says, They parted my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast
lots. The soldiers therefore did indeed these things.

3 [19:25]And there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and the
sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary the Magdalene.
[19:26]Then Jesus seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by whom
he loved, said to his mother, Woman, behold your son. [19:27]Then he
said to the disciple, Behold your mother. And from that hour the
disciple took her to his own [house].

4 [19:28]After this, Jesus knowing that all things were already
finished, that the Scripture might be fully accomplished, said, I
thirst. [19:29]Then a vessel was set full of vinegar; and filling a
sponge with vinegar, and putting it on a hyssop stalk, they presented
it to his mouth. [19:30]When therefore Jesus took the vinegar, he said,
It is finished; and inclining his head gave up the spirit.

5 [19:31]Then the Jews, that the bodies might not continue on the cross
on the sabbath, for it was the preparation, for that was a great
sabbath, asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and they be taken
down. [19:32]Then the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and
of the other crucified with him, [19:33]and coming to Jesus, when they
saw him already dead, they broke not his legs; [19:34]but one of the
soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and immediately there came out
blood and water. [19:35]He who saw has testified, and his testimony is
true, for he knows that he says what is true, that you also may
believe. [19:36]For these things were done that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be broken; [19:37]and again another
Scripture says, They shall look on him whom they have pierced.

6 [19:38]After these things Joseph from Arimathea, being a disciple of
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked Pilate that he might
take down the body of Jesus; and Pilate permitted him. Then he came and
took his body. [19:39]And Nicodemus, who at first came to Jesus by
night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred
pounds.  [19:40]Then they took the body of Jesus, and bound it with
bandages, with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to prepare for
burial. [19:41]And there was in the place where he was crucified a
garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one was yet laid.
[19:42]In that therefore they laid Jesus, on account of the preparation
of the Jews, because the tomb was near.




CHAPTER XXII. CHRIST AFTER THE RESURRECTION.


1 [20:1]AND on the first day of the week, Mary the Magdalene came in
the morning, while it was yet dark, to the tomb and saw the stone taken
away from the tomb. [20:2]Then she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to
the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, They have taken
away the Lord from the tomb, and we know not where they have laid him.
[20:3]Then went Peter and the other disciple, and came to the tomb.
[20:4]And the two ran together; and the other disciple outran Peter and
came first to the tomb, [20:5]and stooping down saw the bandages lying,
but he went not in. [20:6]Then Simon Peter came following him, and went
into the tomb, and beheld the bandages lying, [20:7]and the napkin
which was on his head not lying with the bandages but folded up in a
place by itself. [20:8]Then the other disciple who came first to the
tomb also entered in, and saw and believed; [20:9]for they did not yet
know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead.  [20:10]Then the
disciples went away by themselves.

2 [20:11]But Mary stood at the tomb outside, weeping. Then as she wept
she stooped down to the tomb, [20:12]and saw two angels in white
sitting one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain. [20:13]And they said to her, Woman, why do you weep?
She said to them, Because they have taken my Lord and I know not where
they have laid him. [20:14]Having said these words she turned around
and beheld Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. [20:15]Jesus
said to her, Woman, why do you weep? whom do you seek? She, supposing
that he was the gardener, said to him, Sir, if you have borne him away,
tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him. [20:16]Jesus said
to her, Mary. She, turning around, said to him in Hebrew, Rabboni,
which is interpreted, Teacher. [20:17]Jesus said to her, Do not touch
me; for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to my brothers
and tell them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and my God and
your God. [20:18]Mary the Magdalene came and told the disciples that
she had seen the Lord, and that he said these things to her.

3 [20:19]Then when it was evening, on that first day of the week, and
the doors were shut where the disciples were for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, Peace be to you.
[20:20]And having said this he showed them both his hands and his side;
then the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. [20:21]Then he said
to them again, Peace be to you; as the Father has sent me, I also send
you. [20:22]And having said this he breathed on them, and said to them,
Receive the Holy Spirit.  [20:23]Those whose sins you forgive, are
forgiven; and whose you retain, are retained.

4 [20:24]But Thomas, one of the twelve, called the Twin, was not with
them when Jesus came. [20:25]Then the other disciples said to him, We
have seen the Lord; but he said to them, Unless I see in his hands the
impression of the nails, and put my finger in the impression of the
nails, and put my hand in his side, I will not believe. [20:26]And
after eight days his disciples were again within, and Thomas with them.
Jesus came, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be to you. [20:27]Then he said to Thomas, Reach here your finger
and behold my hands, and reach your hand and put it in my side, and be
not faithless but believing. [20:28]Thomas answered and said to him, My
Lord and my God. [20:29]Jesus said to him, Because you have seen me you
have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and believed.

5 [20:30]Jesus performed also many other miracles in the presence of
his disciples which are not recorded in this book; [20:31]but these are
recorded that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and that believing you may have life in his name.

6 [21:1]After these things he showed himself again to the disciples at
the lake of Tiberias; and he showed himself thus.  [21:2]Simon Peter,
and Thomas called the Twin, and Nathaniel who was from Cana in Galilee,
and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together.
[21:3]Simon Peter said to them, I am going a fishing. They said to him,
We will also go with you.  They went out and entered into the ship; and
on that night caught nothing, [21:4]but when it was now morning Jesus
stood on the shore; but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
[21:5]Then Jesus said to them, Children, have you any thing to eat?
They answered him, No. [21:6]And he said to them, Cast the net on the
right side of the ship and you shall find. Then they cast it, and they
were not able to draw it from the number of fishes.  [21:7]Then that
disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, It is the Lord. Then Simon
Peter, hearing that it was the Lord, girded on his coat, for he was
naked, and cast himself into the lake.  [21:8]But the other disciples
came with the boat, drawing the net of fishes, for they were not far
from the land, but about two hundred cubits distant. [21:9]Then when
they came to land they saw coals placed, and a fish laid upon [them],
and bread. [21:10] Jesus said to them, Bring of the fish that you have
now caught.  [21:11]Simon Peter went and drew the net to the land, full
of great fishes a hundred and fifty-three; and though there were so
many the net was not broken. [21:12]Jesus said to them, Come and
breakfast. No one of the disciples dared to ask him, Who are you?  for
they knew that he was the Lord. [21:13]Jesus came and took the bread
and gave them, and the fish likewise. [21:14]This was now the third
time that Jesus appeared to his disciples after he had arisen from the
dead.

7 [21:15]When therefore they had breakfasted, Jesus said to Simon
Peter, Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these? He said to
him, Yes, Lord, you know that I am a friend to you. He said to him,
Feed my lambs. [21:16]Again he said to him a second time; Simon, son of
John, do you love me? He said to him, Yes, Lord, you know that I am a
friend to you. He said to him, Feed my sheep. [21:17] He said to him a
third time; Simon, son of John, are you a friend to me? Peter was
grieved that he said to him the third time, Are you a friend to me? and
he said to him, Lord you know all things; you know that I am a friend
to you. Jesus said to him, Feed my sheep. [21:18]I tell you most truly,
that when you were young you girded yourself and walked where you
would; but when you become old, you shall stretch out your hands and
another shall bind you and carry you where you would not; [21:19]but he
said this signifying by what death he should glorify God; and having
said this, he said to him, Follow me.

8 [21:20]And Peter turning around saw the disciple whom Jesus loved
following, who also reclined at the supper on his breast and said,
Lord, who is it that is to betray you? [21:21]Peter seeing him said to
Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man [do]?  [21:22]Jesus said to him,
If I wish him to continue till I come, what is that to you? follow me.
[21:23]The report then went out among the brothers that this disciple
would not die; but Jesus said not to him, He shall not die; but, If I
wish him to continue till I come, what is that to you?

9 [21:24]This is the disciple who testifies of these things and has
written them; and we know that his testimony is true.  [21:25]And there
are many other things which Jesus did, which, if they should be written
particularly, I do not suppose the world itself could contain the books
written.





