THE GOSPEL OF LUKE. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION, AND THE TWO ANNUNCIATIONS.


1 [1:1]SINCE many have undertaken to arrange a complete digest of the
things fully believed among us, [1:2]as they delivered them to us who,
from the beginning, were eye witnesses and ministers of the word,
[1:3]it seemed good to me also, having traced all things accurately
from the first, to write in order to you, most excellent Theophilus,
[1:4]that you may know the certainty of the words concerning which you
have been taught.

2 [1:5]In the days of Herod the king of Judea, there was a certain
priest by the name of Zachariah, of the class of Abijah; and his wife
was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. [1:6]And
they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord blameless.  [1:7] And they had no son,
because Elizabeth was barren, and both were advanced in years.

3 [1:8]And when he was performing the priest's office in the order of
his class before God, it fell to his lot, [1:9]according to the custom
of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the Lord to burn incense;
[1:10]and all the multitude of the people were praying without, at the
hour of incense. [1:11]And an angel of the Lord appeared to him,
standing on the right side of the altar of incense; [1:12]and Zachariah
was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.

4 [1:13]And the angel said to him, Fear not, Zachariah, for your prayer
is heard, and your wife Elizabeth shall bear you a son; and you shall
call his name John. [1:14]And he shall be to you a joy and rejoicing;
and many shall rejoice at his birth; [1:15]for he shall be great in the
sight of the Lord, and shall not drink wine and strong drink, but shall
be filled with the Holy Spirit even from his birth; [1:16]and many of
the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. [1:17]And
he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the
hearts of fathers to children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the
righteous, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. [1:18] And
Zachariah said to the angel, By what shall I know this? for I am an old
man, and my wife advanced in years. [1:19]And the angel answered and
said to him, I am Gabriel, who stand before God; and I was sent to
speak to you, and to tell you this good news.  [1:20]And behold you
shall be silent, and not able to speak, till the day these things are
accomplished; because you have not believed my words, which shall be
fulfilled in their time.

5 [1:21]And the people waited for Zachariah, and wondered that he staid
so long in the temple. [1:22]And when he came out he could not speak to
them; and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. And
he made signs to them, and continued dumb.  [1:23]And when the days of
his service were completed he departed to his house. [1:24]And after
these days Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and hid herself five
months, saying, [1:25]Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the days in
which he looked upon me to take away my reproach among men.

6 [1:26]And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a
city of Galilee, by the name of Nazareth, [1:27]to a virgin espoused to
a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the name of the
virgin was Mary. [1:28]And coming in to her, he said, Hail, favored
one! The Lord is with you! [1:29]And she was troubled at his word, and
doubted what this salutation meant.  [1:30]And the angel said to her,
Fear not, Mary, for you have found favor with God. [1:31]And behold you
shall be with child, and bear a son, and shall call his name Jesus.
[1:32]He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High.
And the Lord God shall give him the throne of David his father,
[1:33]and he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

7 [1:34]And Mary said to the angel, How shall this be, since I know not
a man? [1:35]And the angel answered and said to her, The Holy Spirit
shall come upon you, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow
you; and on that account the holy child shall be called the Son of God.
[1:36]And behold Elizabeth, your relative, even she is pregnant with a
son in her old age, and this is the sixth month to her called barren;
[1:37]for nothing is impossible with God. [1:38] And Mary said, Behold,
I am the servant of the Lord! Let it be to me according to your word.
And the angel departed from her.




CHAPTER II. MARYS VISIT TO ELIZABETH, AND THE BIRTH OF JOHN.


1 [1:39]AND Mary arose in those days and went in haste to the
mountainous country, to the city of Juda. [1:40]And she went unto the
house of Zachariah and saluted Elizabeth. [1:41]And when Elizabeth
heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb. And
Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit, [1:42]and cried with a loud
voice, and said, Blessed are you among women!  and blessed is the fruit
of your womb! [1:43]And whence is this to me, that the mother of my
Lord has come to me? [1:44]For, behold, when the voice of your
salutation came to my ears, the babe leaped in my womb with exultation.
[1:45] And blessed is she that believed; for there shall be an
accomplishment of the words spoken to her by the Lord.

2 [1:46]And Mary said, My soul magnifies the Lord, [1:47]and my spirit
exults in God my Saviour; [1:48]for he has looked on the low condition
of his servant; for, behold, from this time all generations shall call
me blessed, [1:49] because the mighty One has done great things for me,
and holy is his name; [1:50]and his mercy is to generations and
generations of them that fear him.  [1:51]He has made strong his arm;
he has scattered the proud with the thought of their hearts; [1:52]he
has brought down the mighty from thrones, and exalted the humble;
[1:53]he has filled the hungry with goods, and sent the rich away
empty. [1:54]He has helped Israel his servant, and remembered his
mercy, [1:55] as he said to our fathers, to Abraham and his posterity
forever.  [1:56]And Mary remained with her about three months, and
returned to her house.

3 [1:57]And when Elizabeth's time to bear had fully come, she bore a
son; [1:58]and her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had
magnified his mercy to her, and congratulated her.  [1:59]And they came
on the eighth day to circumcise the little child, and called it by the
name of its father, Zachariah.  [1:60]And his mother answered and said,
No; but he shall be called John. [1:61] And they said to her, There is
no one of your relations who is called by this name; [1:62]and they
made signs to his father, what he wished it to be called. [1:63]And
asking for a writing-tablet, he wrote, saying, His name is John. And
all wondered. [1:64]And his mouth was immediately opened, and his
tongue [loosed], and he spoke and blessed God. [1:65]And fear came on
all living around them. All these things were talked of in all the
mountainous country of Judea. [1:66]And all who heard laid them to
heart, saying, What then is this child to be? For the hand of the Lord
was also with him.

4 [1:67]And Zachariah his father was filled with the Holy Spirit, and
prophesied, saying, [1:68]Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel,
because he has visited and redeemed his people, [1:69]and raised up a
horn of salvation for us in the house of David his servant; [1:70]as he
said by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old; [1:71]A salvation
from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, [1:72]to
perform his mercy with our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant,
[1:73]the oath which he swore to Abraham our father, [1:74]to grant us
without fear, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, to serve
him [1:75]in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
[1:76]And you, little child, shall be called a prophet of the Most
High; for you shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,
[1:77]to give a knowledge of salvation to his people, with a
forgiveness of sins, [1:78]on account of the compassionate mercies of
our God, by which a morning from on high has visited us, [1:79]to
illuminate those sitting in darkness and the shade of death, to direct
our feet in the way of peace. [1:80]And the child grew, and became
strong in spirit, and was in the wilderness till the day of his
manifestation to Israel.




CHAPTER III. THE BIRTH OF CHRIST, HIS INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD.


1 [2:1]In those days there went out an ordinance from Caesar Augustus
that a census should be taken of all the world.  [2:2]This first census
was taken when Cyrenius was proconsul of Syria. [2:3]And all went to be
enrolled, each one to his own city. [2:4]And Joseph went up from
Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David,
which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of
David, [2:5]to be enrolled with Mary his espoused [wife,] who was with
child. [2:6]And while they were there the days for her delivery were
completed; [2:7]and she bore her first-born son, and wrapped him in
bandages, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the khan.

2 [2:8]And there were shepherds in that country staying in the fields
and watching their flock by night. [2:9]And behold, an angel of the
Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and
they were greatly afraid. [2:10]And the angel said to them, Fear not;
for, behold, I bring you good news of a great joy, which shall be for
all people. [2:11]For to you was born to-day in the city of David, a
Saviour who is the anointed Lord. [2:12]And this shall be a sign to
you. You shall find the babe wrapped in bandages, lying in a manger.
[2:13]And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host, praising God, and saying, [2:14]Glory to God in the highest
[heavens], on earth peace, and among men good will!

3 [2:15]And when the angels had departed from them to heaven, the
shepherds said one to another, Let us go now to Bethlehem, and see this
thing which has occurred, which the Lord has made known to us.
[2:16]And they came in haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe
lying in the manger. [2:17]And when they saw it they related the word
spoken to them concerning this child; [2:18] and all who heard wondered
at the things told them by the shepherds.  [2:19]But Mary kept all
these words, revolving them in her mind.  [2:20]And the shepherds
returned, glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and
seen, as it was told them.

4 [2:21]And when eight days were completed, [the time] to circumcise
him, his name was called Jesus, the name given him by the angel before
he was conceived in the womb. [2:22]And when the days of their
purification were completed according to the law of Moses, they carried
him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, [2:23]as it is written
in the law of the Lord that every male which is a first born shall be
called holy to the Lord, [2:24]and to offer a sacrifice according to
what is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtle doves, or two
young pigeons.

5 [2:25]And behold, there was a man at Jerusalem whose name was Simeon;
and this man was just and pious, waiting for the consolation of Israel,
and the Holy Spirit was on him. [2:26]And he was informed by the Holy
Spirit that he should not see death till he had seen the Lord's
anointed. [2:27]And he came by the spirit into the temple, and when the
parents brought in the child Jesus, to do according to the custom of
the law concerning him, [2:28]he also took it in his arms, and blessed
God, and said, [2:29]Now, Master, dismiss thy servant according to thy
word, in peace; [2:30]for my eyes have seen thy salvation, [2:31]which
thou hast prepared before all people; [2:32]a light for enlightening
Gentiles, and a glory of thy people Israel.  [2:33]And his father and
mother wondered at the words spoken of him.

6 [2:34]And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is set for the fall and rise of many in Israel, and for a
sign spoken against, [2:35]and a sword shall pierce your own soul also,
that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.

7 [2:36]And there was Anna, a prophetess, a daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asher; she was far advanced in years, having lived with a
husband seven years from her virginity; [2:37]and she had been a widow
eighty-four years, and departed not from the temple, serving God night
and day with fastings and prayers.  [2:38]And she coming by at that
time, praised God, and spoke of him [the child] to all who expected a
redemption in Jerusalem.  [2:39]And when they had finished all things
according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their
city Nazareth.  [2:40]And the little child grew, and became strong,
being filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon it.

8 [2:41]And his parents went up yearly to Jerusalem to the feast of the
passover. [2:42]And when he was twelve years old they went up to
Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast. [2:43]And having
completed the days, on their return, the child Jesus remained behind at
Jerusalem. And his parents knew it not.  [2:44]But supposing that he
was in the company went a day's journey and sought him among their
relations and acquaintances.  [2:45]And not finding him they returned
to Jerusalem to seek him.  [2:46]And after three days they found him
sitting in the temple in the midst of the teachers, both hearing and
questioning them.  [2:47]And all who heard him were astonished at his
understanding and his answers.

9 [2:48]And when they saw him they were astonished; and his mother said
to him, Son, why have you dealt thus with us? Behold, your father and I
have sought you with sorrow. [2:49]And he said to them, Why did you
seek me? did you not know that I must be in [the courts] of my father?
[2:50]And they understood not the word which he spoke to them.
[2:51]And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject
to them. And his mother kept all these things in her heart. [2:52]And
Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.




CHAPTER IV. THE MINISTRY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST, CHRIST'S BAPTISM AND GENEALOGY.


1 [3:1]AND in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
Pontius Pilate being procurator of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of
Galilee, and Philip his brother tetrarch of Ituria and the country of
Trachonitis, and Lysanias being tetrarch of Abilene, [3:2]under the
chief priest Annas, and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John the son
of Zachariah, in the wilderness. [3:3]And he went into all the region
about the Jordan, preaching the baptism of a change of mind for the
forgiveness of sins; [3:4]as it is written in the book of the words of
Isaiah the prophet; A voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare
the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. [3:5]Every ravine shall
be filled up, and every mountain and hill shall be made low; and the
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways smooth; [3:6]and all
flesh shall see the salvation of God.

2 [3:7]Then John said to the multitudes who went out to be baptized by
him, Offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to
come? [3:8] Bear fruits, therefore, worthy of a change of mind. And say
not within yourselves, We have Abraham for a father; for I tell you
that God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
[3:9]And already also the axe lies at the root of the trees; every tree
therefore which bears not good fruit, is cut down and cast into the
fire. [3:10]And the multitudes asked him, saying, What then shall we
do? [3:11]And he answered and said to them, Let him that has two coats
give to him that has none; and let him that has food do the same.
[3:12]And publicans, also, came to be baptized, and said to him,
Teacher, what shall we do? [3:13]And he said to them, Do nothing more
than is appointed for you. [3:14]And the soldiers asked him, saying,
And what shall we do? And he said to them, Oppress, and falsely accuse,
no one; and be contented with your wages.

3 [3:15]And the people being in expectation, and all doubting in their
minds concerning John, whether he was the Christ, [3:16]John answered
all, saying, I indeed baptize you with water, but a mightier than I is
coming, the strings of whose shoes I am not fit to untie; he shall
baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. [3:17]His winnowing shovel
is in his hand, and he will thoroughly clean his threshing floor, and
gather the wheat into his storehouse; but the chaff he will burn with
an inextinguishable fire.

4 [3:18]With many other exhortations, also, he preached the good news
to the people. [3:19]But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him on
account of Herodias his brother's wife and for all the evil deeds which
Herod had done, [3:20]added also this to all, and shut up John in
prison.

5 [3:21]And when all the people were baptized, Jesus also being
baptized, and praying, heaven was opened, [3:22]and the Holy Spirit
descended in a bodily form like a dove upon him; and there was a voice
from heaven, saying, You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.

6 [3:23]And Jesus was about thirty years old, being, as was supposed,
the son of Joseph, the son of Eli, [3:24]the son of Matthat, the son of
Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
[3:25]the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son
of Esli, the son of Naggai, [3:26] the son of Maath, the son of
Mattathias, the son of Shimei, the son of Josech, the son of Juda,
[3:27]the son of Joannas, the son of Resa, the son of Zerubabel, the
son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri, [3:28]the son of Melchi, the son of
Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er, [3:29]the
son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of
Matthat, the son of Levi, [3:30]the son of Simeon, the son of Judah,
the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of Eliakim, [3:31]the son
of Meleas, the son of Mennas, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan,
the son of David, [3:32]the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of
Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Naason, [3:33]the son of Aminadab,
the son of Admein, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of
Pharez, the son of Judah, [3:34]the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the
son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, [3:35]the son of
Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Heber, the son of
Selah, [3:36]the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem,
the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, [3:37]the son of Methusaleh, the
son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahaleel, the son of Cainan,
[3:38]the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the Son of God.




CHAPTER V. CHRIST'S FASTING, TEMPTATION, AND THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS MINISTRY.


1 [4:1]AND Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan,
and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness, [4:2]being tempted by the
devil forty days. And he eat nothing in those days; and when they were
completed he was hungry. [4:3]And the devil said to him, If you are the
Son of God, command this stone to become bread. [4:4]And Jesus answered
him, It is written, that man shall not live by bread alone. [4:5]And
taking him up he showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment
of time.  [4:6]And the devil said to him, All this power will I give
you, and the glory of these; for it is given to me, and I give it to
whom I will. [4:7]If you, therefore, will worship me, it all shall be
yours. [4:8]And Jesus answered and said to him, It is written, You
shall worship the Lord your God, and him alone shall you serve.
[4:9]And he brought him to Jerusalem and placed him on the pinnacle of
the temple, and said to him, If you are the Son of God, cast yourself
down from here; [4:10]for it is written, He will charge his angels
concerning you, to guard you, [4:11]and they shall bear you up on their
hands, lest at any time you dash your foot against a stone. [4:12]And
Jesus answered and said to him, It is said, You shall not try the Lord
your God. [4:13]And the devil having finished all the temptation,
departed from him for a time.

2 [4:14]And Jesus returned with the power of the Spirit to Galilee; and
his fame went out into all the region around.  [4:15]And he taught in
their synagogues, glorified by all.

3 [4:16]And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up, and entered,
according to his custom on the sabbath day, into the synagogue, and
stood up to read. [4:17]And the book of Isaiah the prophet was given to
him. And unrolling the book he found the place where it was written,
[4:18]The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach good news to the poor; he has sent me to proclaim a release to
the captives, and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the
oppressed away free, [4:19]to proclaim an acceptable year of the Lord.
[4:20]And folding up the book, he gave it to the minister, and sat
down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were steadfastly fixed upon
him.

4 [4:21]And he said to them, To-day is this scripture fulfilled in your
ears. [4:22]And they all bore him witness, and wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded from his mouth, and said, Is not this the son of
Joseph? [4:23]And he said to them, You will undoubtedly tell me this
proverb; Physician, cure yourself; things which we heard were done in
Capernaum, do also here in your own country. [4:24]And he said, I tell
you truly, that no prophet is acceptable in his own country. [4:25]I
also tell you of a truth, that there were many widows in Israel in the
days of Elijah, when heaven was shut up three years and six months, so
that there was a great famine over all the land; [4:26]and to none of
them was Elijah sent, but to Sarepta, of Sidon, to a widow woman.
[4:27]And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the
prophet, and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian. [4:28]And
all in the synagogue when they heard these things were filled with
wrath; [4:29]and they arose and cast him out of the city, and led him
even to the brow of the mountain on which the city was built, to
precipitate him down.  [4:30]But he passed through the midst of them
and went away.




CHAPTER VI. CHRIST AT CAPERNAUM, AND HIS PREACHING AND MIRACLES IN GALILEE.


1 [4:31]AND he went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught
them on the sabbath; [4:32]and they were astonished at his teaching,
for his word was with power. [4:33]And there was a man in the synagogue
having a spirit of an impure demon; and he cried with a loud voice,
[4:34]Alas! what have you to do with us, Jesus Nazarene? Have you come
to destroy us? I know you who you are, the Holy [Son] of God! [4:35]And
Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hush!  and come out of him. And the demon
casting him into the midst came out of him, doing him no injury.
[4:36]And they were all amazed, and talked with each other, saying,
What word is this, that with authority and power he commands the impure
spirits, and they come out? [4:37]And a report of him went abroad into
every place in the country about.

2 [4:38]And going up from the synagogue he entered into the house of
Simon. And Simon's mother-in-law was sick with a violent fever; and
they asked him in her behalf. [4:39]And standing over her he rebuked
the fever, and it left her. And she immediately arose and waited on
them.

3 [4:40]And when the sun went down, all who had friends sick with
various diseases brought them to him; and putting his hands on each one
of them he cured them; [4:41]and demons also went out of many, crying
and saying, You are the Son of God! And he rebuked them, and charged
them not to say that they knew him to be the Christ.

4 [4:42]And when it was day, coming out he went to a solitary place;
and the multitudes sought him, and came to him, and urged him not to
depart from them. [4:43]But he said to them, I must preach the good
news of the kingdom of God in the other cities also, because for this
am I sent; [4:44]and he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.

5 [5:1]And as the multitude pressed upon him to hear the word of God,
and he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret, [5:2]he saw two boats
standing by the lake; and the fishermen having gone out of them were
washing their nets. [5:3] And entering into one of the ships, which was
Simon's, he asked him to put out a little from the land, and sat down
and taught the multitudes from the ship. [5:4]And when he ceased
speaking, he said to Simon, Put out into the deep water, and let down
your nets for a draught.  [5:5]And Simon answered and said to him,
Master, we have labored all night and taken nothing; but at your word I
will let down the net. [5:6]And doing this he enclosed a great number
of fishes; and their net broke. [5:7]And he made signs to his
companions in the other ship to come and help him; and they came, and
filled both ships, so that they began to sink. [5:8]And Simon Peter
seeing it fell on his knees to Jesus, saying, Depart from me, Lord, for
I am a sinful man. [5:9]For he was amazed, and all that were with him,
at the draught of fishes which they had taken.  [5:10]So also were
James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And
Jesus said to Simon, Fear not; from this time you shall take men.
[5:11]And bringing the ships to the land they left all and followed him.

6 [5:12]And he was in one of the cities, and behold, a man full of
leprosy; and seeing Jesus he fell on his face, and asked him, saying,
Lord, if you will, you can cleanse me. [5:13]And stretching out his
hand he touched him, saying, I will; be cleansed. And immediately the
leprosy left him. [5:14]And he charged him to tell no one, but go and
show yourself to the priest, and present an offering for your
purification, as Moses commanded, for a testimony to them. [5:15]And
the report concerning him went abroad extensively; and great multitudes
came together to hear him, and to be cured of their diseases. [5:16]
And he withdrew into solitary places and prayed.




CHAPTER VII. CHRIST FORGIVING SINS, CALLING LEVI, EATING WITH PUBLICANS AND SINNERS, AND EXPOUNDING THE LAWS OF FASTING AND THE SABBATH.


1 [5:17]AND on one of those days he was teaching, and the Pharisees and
teachers of the law were present, having come from every village of
Galilee, and of Judea, and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord
was present to cure them. [5:18]And behold, men bringing on a bed a man
who was paralytic; and they sought to bring him in to place him before
him. [5:19]And not finding how they could bring him in, on account of
the multitude, they went up on the house, and let him down through the
tiles, with his little bed, into the midst before Jesus. [5:20]And
seeing their faith, he said, Man, your sins are forgiven you.

2 [5:21]And the scribes and Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is
this that speaks blasphemies? who can forgive sins, but God alone?
[5:22]And Jesus knowing their thoughts answered and said to them, Why
do you reason in your minds? [5:23]in what is it easier to say, Your
sins are forgiven you, than to say, Arise and walk? [5:24]But that you
may know that the Son of man has power on the earth to forgive sins, he
said to the paralytic, I tell you, arise, and take up your little bed,
and go to your house. [5:25]And he arose immediately before them, and
taking up that on which he had lain departed to his house, glorifying
God.  [5:26]And all were astonished, and glorified God, and were filled
with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to-day.

3 [5:27]And after these things he went out and saw a publican by the
name of Levi, sitting at the custom house, and said to him, Follow me.
[5:28]And leaving all he arose and followed him.  [5:29]And Levi made a
great feast for him at his house; and there was a great multitude of
publicans and of others who reclined with them. [5:30]And the Pharisees
and their scribes complained to his disciples, saying, Why do you eat
and drink with publicans? [5:31]And Jesus answered and said to them,
The well need not a physician, but the ill. [5:32]I have not come to
call the righteous, but sinners to a change of mind.

4 [5:33]And they said to him, The disciples of John fast much and make
prayers; and likewise those of the Pharisees; but yours eat and drink.
[5:34]And he said to them, Can you make the children of the
bridechamber fast while the bridegroom is with them?  [5:35]But days
will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them; then shall they
fast in those days.

5 [5:36]And he spoke also a parable to them; That no one puts a piece
of a new garment on an old garment; if he does, the new both tears the
old, and that from the new disagrees with the old.  [5:37]And no one
puts new wine into old bottles; if he does, the new wine will break the
bottles, and itself be poured out, and the bottles be destroyed.
[5:38]But new wine must be put into new bottles. [5:39]And no one
drinking old wine desires new; for he says the old is good.

6 [6:1]And on the second-first sabbath he went through the grain
fields, and his disciples picked the heads and eat, rubbing them in
their hands. [6:2]And some of the Pharisees said, Why do you do what is
not lawful on the sabbath? [6:3]And Jesus answered and said to them,
Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those with
him? [6:4]He entered into the house of God, and took the show bread,
and eat, and gave to those with him, which it was not lawful for any to
eat, except the priests alone. [6:5]And he said to them, The Son of man
is Lord even of the sabbath.

7 [6:6]And on another sabbath he went into the synagogue and taught.
And there was a man there whose right hand was withered.  [6:7]And the
scribes and Pharisees watched him [to see] if he would perform a cure
on the sabbath, that they might find [something of which] to accuse
him. [6:8]But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man having the
withered hand, Arise, and stand in the midst. And he arose and stood.
[6:9]And Jesus said to them, I will ask you whether it is lawful on the
sabbath to do good or to do evil? to save a life or to destroy?
[6:10]And looking round upon them all he said to him, Stretch out your
hand. And he did so; and his hand was restored. [6:11]And they were
filled with madness, and conferred with each other as to what they
should do to Jesus.




CHAPTER VIII. CHRIST CALLING THE TWELVE APOSTLES.


1 [6:12]AND in those days he went out on the mountain to pray, and
spent the whole night in prayer to God. [6:13]And when it was day he
called his disciples; and having chosen twelve of them, whom he named
apostles, [6:14] Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his
brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, [6:15]Matthew and
Thomas, James, the son of Alpheus, and Simon called Zealot, [6:16]Judas
the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who was the traitor, [6:17]he
went down with them and stood on a plain; and a multitude of his
disciples, and a great multitude of the people from all Judea and
Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him,
and to be cured of their diseases; [6:18]and those troubled with impure
spirits were cured. [6:19]And all the multitude sought to touch him,
for a power went out from him and cured all.

2 [6:20]And he lifted up his eyes upon his disciples and said, Blessed
are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.  [6:21]Blessed are you
that hunger now, for you shall be filled.  Blessed are you that weep
now, for you shall laugh. [6:22]Blessed are you when men shall hate
you, and when they shall exclude you from their company, and reproach
and cast out your names as evil, on account of the Son of man.
[6:23]Rejoice in that day, and be exceedingly glad; for behold, your
reward is great in heaven. For in this manner did their fathers to the
prophets. [6:24]But woe to you rich! for you have your consolation.
[6:25]Woe to you full! for you shall be hungry. Woe to you who laugh
now! for you shall mourn and weep. [6:26]Woe, when all men speak well
of you!  for in this manner did their fathers of the false prophets.

3 [6:27]But I tell you that hear, Love your enemies; do good to those
that hate you; [6:28]bless those that curse you; pray for those that
injure you; [6:29] to him that strikes you on the cheek, present also
the other; and forbid not him who takes away your cloak to take your
coat also. [6:30]Give to every one that asks; and from him who takes
that which is yours, ask it not back. [6:31]And as you wish men to do
to you, do you also in like manner to them. [6:32]And if you love those
that love you, what thanks have you? for sinners also love those that
love them.  [6:33]And if you do good to those who do good to you, what
thanks have you? for sinners do the same. [6:34]And if you lend to
those from whom you hope to receive, what thanks have you? sinners also
lend to sinners, to receive back as much again. [6:35]But love your
enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing in return; and your
reward shall be great, and you shall be children of the Most High; for
he is good to the unthankful and evil.  [6:36]Be merciful, as your
father is merciful; [6:37]and judge not, and you shall not be judged;
and condemn not, and you shall not be condemned; release, and you shall
be released; [6:38]give, and it shall be given to you; good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, running over, shall they give into your
bosom. For with what measure you measure it shall be measured back to
you.

4 [6:39]And he spoke also a parable to them; Can the blind lead the
blind? Will not both fall into the pit? [6:40]A disciple is not above
his teacher, but every perfect one will be as his teacher. [6:41]And
why do you see the speck in your brother's eye, and observe not the
beam in your own eye? [6:42]How can you say to your brother, Brother,
let me cast out the speck in your eye, and you yourself see not the
beam in your own eye?  Hypocrite, cast out first the beam from your
eye, and then you will see clearly to cast out the speck from your
brother's eye.  [6:43]For there is no good tree which bears bad fruit,
nor, again, a bad tree which bears good fruit. [6:44]For every tree is
known by its own fruit. For they do not gather figs from thorns, nor do
they pick grapes from brambles. [6:45]The good man out of the good
treasury of his heart brings forth good, and the evil man out of the
evil brings forth evil; for out of the abundance of the heart its mouth
speaks.

5 [6:46]And why do you call me Lord! Lord! and do not what I say?
[6:47]Every one that comes to me, and hears my words and does them, I
will show you whom he is like. [6:48]He is like a man building a house,
who dug and went deep, and laid the foundation on the rock; and when
there was a flood, the stream beat against that house and could not
shake it, because it was built on a rock. [6:49]But he that hears and
does not, is like a man building a house on the earth, without a
foundation, against which the stream beat, and it fell immediately; and
the ruin of that house was great.




CHAPTER IX. CHRIST AT CAPERNAUM AND NAIN, HIS REPLY TO JOHN THE BAPTIST, ETC.


1 [7:1]WHEN he had finished all his discourses in the hearing of the
people, he entered into Capernaum. [7:2]And a certain centurion's
servant, who was dear to him, was sick, and about to die; [7:3]and he
hearing of Jesus, sent to him the elders of the Jews, asking him to
come and cure his servant. [7:4]And having come to Jesus they besought
him earnestly, saying, He is worthy for whom you should do this;
[7:5]for he loves our nation, and has built us a synagogue. [7:6]And
Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the
centurion sent friends to him, saying, Lord, trouble not yourself, for
I am not fit that you should come under my roof. [7:7]Wherefore I did
not think myself worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my
servant shall be cured; [7:8] for I also am a man placed under
authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to one, Go, and he goes,
and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he
does it. [7:9]And Jesus hearing these things wondered at him, and
turning around said to the multitude following him, I tell you I have
not found in Israel so great a faith; [7:10]and those sent returning to
the house found the sick servant well.

2 [7:11]And on the next day he went to a city called Nain, and a
considerable number of his disciples and a great multitude went with
him. [7:12]And as he approached the gate of the city, behold, a dead
man was carried out, an only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
And a great multitude from the city was with her. [7:13]And seeing her,
the Lord had compassion on her, and said to her, Weep not. [7:14]And
approaching he touched the bier, and those who bore it stopped. And he
said, Young man, I tell you, arise! [7:15]And the dead sat up, and
began to speak; and he gave him to his mother. [7:16]And fear seized
all; and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet is raised up among
us; and, God has visited his people. [7:17]And this report of him went
out into all Judea, and into all the region around.

3 [7:18]And his disciples told John of all these things.  [7:19]And
calling two of his disciples, John sent to the Lord, saying, Are you he
that was to come, or look we for another?  [7:20]And coming to him the
men said, John the Baptist has sent us to you to say, Are you he that
was to come, or look we for another? [7:21]And in that hour he cured
many of diseases, and plagues, and of evil spirits, and gave sight to
many blind.  [7:22]And Jesus answered and said to them, Go and tell
John what you have seen and heard; that the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor have the good news preached to them; [7:23]and blessed is he who
shall not be offended with me.

4 [7:24]And when the messengers of John had gone away, he said to the
multitudes concerning John, What went you out into the wilderness to
see? A reed shaken with a wind? [7:25]But what went you out to see? A
man dressed in fine clothes? Behold, those who wear fine clothes, and
live in luxury, are in royal palaces.  [7:26]But what went you out to
see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet. [7:27]This is
he of whom it is written; Behold, I send my messenger before your face,
who shall prepare your way before you. [7:28]I tell you, that among
those born of women there is no greater prophet than John; but the
least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. [7:29]And all the
people who heard this, and the publicans, justified God, having
received the baptism of John. [7:30]But the Pharisees and lawyers
rejected the counsel of God as to themselves, not having been baptized
by him.

5 [7:31][And he said], To what then shall I compare the men of this
generation? and what are they like? [7:32]They are like little children
sitting in the market, and they call to each other, saying, We have
played on pipes to you, and you have not danced; we have mourned to
you, and you have not lamented. [7:33] For John the Baptist came
neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, He has a demon.
[7:34]The Son of man has come eating and drinking, and you say, Behold
a glutton and a wine drinker! a friend of publicans and sinners! [7:35]
And Wisdom is justified by all her children.




CHAPTER X. CHRIST ANOINTED BY THE WOMAN, HIS TRAVELS AND ATTENDANTS, THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER.


1 [7:36]AND one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him; and going
into the Pharisee's house he reclined. [7:37]And behold, a certain
woman in the city, a sinner, knowing that he was reclining in the house
of the Pharisee, brought a vase of ointment, [7:38]and standing behind,
by his feet, weeping, washed his feet with tears, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head; and she kissed his feet, and anointed them with
the ointment.  [7:39]And the Pharisee who invited him, seeing it, spoke
within himself, saying, If this was a prophet he would have known who
and what kind of a woman this is who touches him; for she is a sinner.

2 [7:40]And Jesus answered and said to him, Simon, I have something to
say to you. And he said, Teacher, say it. [7:41]A certain creditor had
two debtors; one owed him five hundred denarii [$70], and the other
fifty [$7]. [7:42]And having nothing to pay, he gave [the debt] to
both. Tell me, therefore, which of them will love him most? [7:43]Simon
answered and said, I suppose the one to whom he gave most. And he said
to him, You have judged rightly. [7:44]And turning to the woman, he
said to Simon, Do you see this woman? I came into your house; you gave
me no water for my feet; but she has wet my feet with tears, and wiped
them with her hairs. [7:45]You gave me no kiss; but she, from the time
that I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. [7:46]You anointed not
my head with oil; but she has anointed my feet with ointment.
[7:47]Therefore, I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven;
for she has loved much; but he to whom little is forgiven, loves
little. [7:48]And he said to her, Your sins are forgiven. [7:49]And
those who reclined with him said within themselves, Who is this that
forgives sins also? [7:50]And he said to the woman, Your faith has
saved you; go in peace.

3 [8:1]And he travelled in order through the cities and villages,
proclaiming and preaching the good news of the kingdom of God; and the
twelve were with him, [8:2]and certain women who had been cured of evil
spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, from whom went out
seven demons, [8:3]and Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and
Susannah, and many others, who served them with their property.

4 [8:4]And a great multitude having come together, and persons having
come to him from every city, he said in a parable, [8:5]A sower went
out to sow his seed; and in his sowing, some fell by the way, and was
trodden down, and the birds of heaven devoured it; [8:6]and some fell
on the rock, and springing up it was dried up, because it had no
moisture; [8:7]and some fell in the midst of thorns, and the thorns
springing up choked it; [8:8]and some fell on good ground, and growing
up bore fruit a hundred fold.  Having said these things, he cried, He
that has ears to hear, let him hear.

5 [8:9]And his disciples asked him, What does this parable mean?
[8:10]And he said, It is given to you to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God, but to others in parables; that seeing they may not
see, and hearing they may not understand. [8:11]But the parable
signifies this; the seed is the word of God; [8:12]those by the way are
those who hear, then comes the devil and takes away the word from their
hearts, that they may not believe and be saved; [8:13]those on the rock
are those who, when they hear, receive the word with joy, and they have
no root; they believe for a time, and in a time of trial fall away;
[8:14] and that which fell among thorns signifies those who hear, and
going away are choked by cares and riches and the pleasures of this
life, and bring no fruit to perfection. [8:15]But that on the good
ground signifies those who, with a noble and good heart, hearing the
word retain it, and bear fruit persistently.

6 [8:16]But no one lights a candle and covers it with a vessel, or puts
it under a bed; but he puts it in a candlestick, that those coming in
may see the light. [8:17]For there is nothing hid which shall not be
manifest, nor concealed which shall not be known and come to light.
[8:18]See therefore how you hear; for whoever has, to him shall be
given, and whoever has not, from him shall be taken away even what he
seems to have.

7 [8:19]And his mother and brothers came to him, and were not able to
approach him on account of the multitude. [8:20]And it was told him by
some, saying, Your mother and your brothers stand without, wishing to
see you. [8:21]And he answered and said to them, My mother and my
brothers are those who hear the word of God and perform it.




CHAPTER XI. CHRIST STILLING A TEMPEST, CURING A DEMONIAC, RAISING THE DAUGHTER OF JAIRUS.


1 [8:22]AND on one of those days both he and his disciples went into
the ship; and he said to them, Let us cross over to the other side of
the lake. And they set sail; [8:23]and as they were sailing he fell
asleep. And a tempest of wind came down on the lake, and they were
flooded with water, and in peril. [8:24] And they came and awoke him,
saying, Master! Master! we are perishing! And he arose, and rebuked the
wind and the waves, and they ceased, and there was a calm. [8:25]And he
said to them, Where is your faith? And they were afraid, and wondered,
saying one to another, What man then is this, that he commands the
winds and the water and they obey him?

2 [8:26]And they sailed to the country of the Gerasenes, which is
opposite to Galilee. [8:27]And as he went out on the land, there met
him a certain man from the city who had had demons for a long time; and
he wore no clothes, and remained not in a house, but in the tombs.
[8:28]And seeing Jesus, he cried out, and worshipped him, and said with
a loud voice, What have you to do with me, Jesus, son of the Most High
God? I beg of you not to torment me; [8:29]for he had commanded the
impure spirit to go out of the man; for it had often seized him; and he
had been bound with chains, and confined with fetters; and breaking his
bonds he had been driven by the demon into solitary places. [8:30]And
Jesus asked him, saying, What is your name? And he said, Legion;
because many demons had entered into him. [8:31]And he besought him not
to command them to go into the abyss. [8:32]And there was a herd of
many swine feeding on the mountain, and they besought him to permit
them to enter into them; and be permitted them.  [8:33]And the demons
going out of the man entered into the swine; and the herd rushed down
the precipice into the lake and were drowned.

3 [8:34]And those who fed them, seeing what was done, fled and reported
it in the city and in the country places. [8:35]And they went out to
see what had happened, and came to Jesus, and found the man from whom
the demons had gone out sitting, clothed and of a sound mind, at the
feet of Jesus; and they were afraid.  [8:36]And those who had seen
related to them how the demoniac had been cured. [8:37]And all the
multitude of the region about the Gerasenes requested him to depart
from them, because they were seized with great fear. And entering into
the ship, he returned.  [8:38]And the man from whom the demons had gone
out desired to be with him; but he sent him away, saying, [8:39]Return
to your house, and declare how great things God has done for you. And
he went away proclaiming in all the city what great things Jesus had
done for him.

4 [8:40]And when Jesus returned the multitude received him; for they
were all waiting for him. [8:41]And behold, a man by the name of Jairus
came; and he was the ruler of a synagogue. And falling at the feet of
Jesus, he besought him to come to his house, [8:42]for he had an only
daughter twelve years old, and she was dying. And when he was going,
the multitudes thronged him. [8:43]And a woman having a hemorrhage of
twelve years, who had spent all her living on physicians, and could not
be cured by any one, [8:44]coming up behind, touched the fringe of his
garment, and immediately her flow of blood was stopped. [8:45] And
Jesus said, Who touched me? And all denying, Peter and those with him
said, Master, the multitudes press upon and throng you, and do you say,
Who touched me? [8:46]And Jesus said, Some one touched me; for I
perceived a power going from me. [8:47]And the woman seeing that she
was not concealed, came trembling, and falling down related to him in
the presence of all the people for what cause she had touched him, and
how she was immediately cured. [8:48]And he said to her, Daughter, your
faith has cured you; go in peace.

5 [8:49]While he was yet speaking some one came from the synagogue
ruler's house and said to him, Your daughter has died; trouble not the
teacher. [8:50] But Jesus hearing it answered him, Fear not; only
believe, and she shall be cured. [8:51]And when he entered into the
house, he permitted no one to go in with him, except Peter, and John,
and James, and the father and mother of the child. [8:52]And all wept
and lamented her. But he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleeps.
[8:53]And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead. [8:54]And
taking her hand, he called, saying, Child, arise! [8:55]And her spirit
returned, and she arose immediately. And he commanded food to be given
her.  [8:56]And her parents were astonished; and he commanded them to
tell no one what was done.




CHAPTER XII. CHRIST ENDOWING THE TWELVE APOSTLES WITH MIRACULOUS POWERS, THE PERPLEXITY OF HEROD, THE FEEDING OF THE FIVE THOUSAND, PETER'S CONFESSION, ETC.


1 [9:1]AND calling together the twelve, he gave them power and
authority over all demons, and to cure diseases, [9:2]and sent them out
to proclaim the kingdom of God, and to cure the sick.  [9:3]And he said
to them, Take for the way neither a staff nor a provision sack, nor
bread, nor silver, and have not two coats apiece. [9:4]And into
whatever house you enter, there remain and thence depart. [9:5]And
whoever does not receive you, when you go out of that city shake off
the dust from your feet for a testimony to them. [9:6]And they went out
and passed through the villages, everywhere proclaiming the good news
and performing cures.

2 [9:7]And Herod the tetrarch heard all things which were done, and was
perplexed, because it was said by some that John was raised from the
dead, [9:8] and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that
one of the old prophets had arisen. [9:9]And Herod said, John I
beheaded; but who is this, of whom I hear such things? And he sought to
see him.

3 [9:10]And the apostles returned and reported to him all things which
they had done. And taking them aside, he departed privately to the city
called Bethsaida. [9:11]And the multitudes knowing it followed him. And
having received them, he spoke to them of the kingdom of God, and cured
those having need of cure. [9:12] And the day began to decline; and the
twelve came and said to him, Dismiss the multitude, that they may go to
the villages and farms around, and lodge, and find provisions; for we
are here in a solitary place. [9:13]And he said to them, Give them
something to eat. And they said, We have not more than five loaves and
two fishes, unless we go and buy provisions for all this multitude;
[9:14]for they were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples, Make them recline in companies of fifty each; [9:15]and they
did so, and caused them all to recline. [9:16]And taking the five
loaves and two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and
broke, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude. [9:17]And
they eat and were all filled; and there was taken up what remained over
to them, twelve traveling-baskets of fragments.

4 [9:18]And when he was praying alone, the disciples came to him, and
he asked them, saying, Who do the multitudes say that I am?  [9:19]And
they answered and said, John the Baptist; and some Elijah, and others
that one of the old prophets has arisen.  [9:20]And he said to them,
Who do you say that I am? And Peter answered and said, The Christ of
God. [9:21]And he charged and commanded them to tell this to no one;
[9:22]saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected
by the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and be
raised on the third day.

5 [9:23]And he said to all, If any one wishes to come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.  [9:24]For whoever
wishes to save his life, shall lose it; and whoever shall lose his life
for my sake, shall save it. [9:25]For what is a man profited if he
gains the whole world and destroys himself, or loses his life?
[9:26]For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and that of the Father,
and of the holy angels. [9:27]And I tell you of a truth, there are some
of those standing here who shall not taste death till they see the
kingdom of God.




CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST TRANSFIGURED, CURING A DEMONIAC, AND REPROVING AMBITION.


1 [9:28]AND about eight days after these words, taking Peter, and
James, and John, he went up on the mountain to pray. [9:29]And while he
was praying, the appearance of his face was changed, and his clothes
became white and shining; [9:30]and behold, two men conversed with him,
who were Moses and Elijah, [9:31] who appearing in glory spoke of his
departure which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. [9:32]And
Peter and those with him were oppressed with sleep; and when they awoke
they saw his glory, and the two men standing with him. [9:33] And when
they were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good
for us to be here; and let us make three tabernacles; one for you, and
one for Moses, and one for Elijah; not knowing what he said.  [9:34]And
when he had said this, a cloud came and overshadowed them; and they
were afraid when they entered into the cloud.  [9:35]And there was a
voice from the cloud, saying, This is my chosen Son; hear him.
[9:36]And when the voice had passed, Jesus was found alone. And they
were silent and told no man in those days any thing of what they had
seen.

2 [9:37]And on the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a
great multitude met him. [9:38]And behold, a man from the multitude
cried, saying, Teacher, I desire you to look upon my son, for he is my
only child; [9:39]and behold a spirit takes him, and suddenly cries out
and convulses him, with foam and crushing him departs from him with
difficulty; [9:40]and I desired your disciples to cast it out, and they
could not.  [9:41]And Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse
generation! How long shall I be with you, and suffer you! Bring your
son hither. [9:42]And while he was coming, the demon tore him with
spasms and convulsed him. And Jesus rebuked the impure spirit, and
cured the child, and gave him back to his father.  [9:43]And they were
all astonished at the majesty of God.

3 And while all wondered at all things which he did, he said to his
disciples, [9:44]Commit these words to your ears; for the Son of man is
about to be delivered into the hands of men. [9:45]But they understood
not this saying; and it was concealed from them, that they might not
perceive it; and they feared to ask him concerning this saying.

4 [9:46]And there arose a debate among them, which of them should be
the greatest. [9:47]And Jesus perceiving the debate in their minds,
took a little child and set it by him, [9:48]and said to them, Whoever
receives this little child in my name, receives me; and whoever
receives me, receives him that sent me. For he that is least among you
all, he shall be the greatest. [9:49]And John answered and said,
Master, we saw one casting out demons in your name, and we forbade him,
because he follows not with us.  [9:50]And Jesus said to him, Forbid
him not; for whoever is not against us is for us.




CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST ON HIS LAST JOURNEY FROM GALILEE TO JERUSALEM.


1 [9:51]AND when the days were completed for his being taken up, he set
his face firmly to go to Jerusalem. [9:52]And he sent messengers before
him; and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to
prepare for him. [9:53]And they did not receive him, because he was
going to Jerusalem. [9:54] And his disciples James and John seeing it,
said, Lord, do you wish us to call fire to come down from heaven and
consume them? [9:55]And he turned around and rebuked them; and they
went to another village.

2 [9:57]And as they were traveling on the way, one said to him, I will
follow you wherever you go. [9:58]And Jesus said to him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of heaven places of shelter; but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head. [9:59]And he said to another, Follow me.
And he said, Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father. [9:60]But
he said to him, Let the dead bury their dead, but do you go and
proclaim abroad the kingdom of God.  [9:61]And another also said, Lord,
I will follow you, but permit me first to bid farewell to those in my
house. [9:62]But Jesus said, No man putting his hand on the plow, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

3 [10:1]And after these things the Lord designated seventy others also,
and sent them out, two by two, before his face, into every city and
place where he was about to come. [10:2]And he said to them, The
harvest indeed is great, but the laborers few; pray, therefore, the
Lord of the harvest to thrust out laborers into his harvest. [10:3]Go;
behold I send you as lambs in the midst of wolves. [10:4]Carry neither
a purse, nor provision sack, nor sandals; and salute no one by the way.
[10:5]And into whatever house you enter, first say, Peace to this
house! [10:6]And if a son of peace is there, your peace shall rest upon
him; but if not, it shall return to you. [10:7]And in the same house
remain, eating and drinking the things with them; for the laborer is
worthy of his reward. Go not about from house to house. [10:8]And into
whatever city you enter, and they receive you, eat what is set before
you; [10:9]and cure the sick in it, and say to them, The kingdom of God
has come nigh to you. [10:10] And into whatever city you enter, and
they receive you not, going out into its streets, say, [10:11]Even the
dust of your city which adheres to our feet we wipe off for you; but
know this, that the kingdom of God is at hand. [10:12]I tell you, it
shall be more tolerable for Sodom in that day than for that city.
[10:13]Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty
works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which have been done in you, they
would long ago have changed their minds, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes. [10:14]But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the
judgment, than for you. [10:15]And you, Capernaum, even to heaven will
you be exalted? even to hades shall you be cast down.  [10:16]He that
hears you, hears me; and he that rejects you, rejects me; and he that
rejects me, rejects him that sent me.

4 [10:17]And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the
demons are subject to us by your name. [10:18]And he said to them, I
saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven. [10:19]Behold, I give you
power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and on all the power of the
enemy; and nothing shall by any means injure you; [10:20]but in this
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your
names are written in heaven.

5 [10:21]In the same hour he rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to babes. Yes, Father, for
so it has seemed good in thy sight.  [10:22]And turning to his
disciples, he said, All things are delivered to me by my Father; and no
one knows who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is but the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. [10:23]And turning
around to his disciples he said privately, Blessed are the eyes which
see what you see! [10:24]For I tell you that many prophets and kings
have desired to see the things which you see, and have not seen them,
and to hear the things which you hear, and have not heard them.




CHAPTER XV. THE WAY OF SALVATION, MARY'S CHOICE, AND LESSONS ON PRAYER.


1 [10:25]AND behold, a certain lawyer stood up to try him, saying,
Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?  [10:26]And he said
to him, What is written in the law? how do you read? [10:27]And he
answered and said, You shall love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all
your mind, and your neighbor as yourself. [10:28] And he said to him,
You have answered well; do this, and you shall live.

2 [10:29]But he, wishing to justify himself, said to Jesus, And who is
my neighbor? [10:30]And Jesus replied and said, A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who both stripped
him and inflicted blows upon him, and went away leaving him half dead.
[10:31]And, providentially, a certain priest went down that way, and
seeing him passed by on the other side. [10:32]And in like manner a
Levite also, being at the place, came and saw him, and passed by on the
other side.  [10:33]But a certain Samaritan, on a journey, came where
he was, and seeing him had compassion on him; [10:34]and he came and
bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine; and putting him on his
own beast, brought him to a khan, and took care of him.  [10:35]And on
the next day, putting out two denarii [28 cents], he gave them to the
khan-keeper, and said, Take care of him, and whatever you expend more,
when I return I will pay you.  [10:36]Which of these three think you
was a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers? [10:37]And he said,
He that had mercy on him. Then said Jesus to him, Do you go and do
likewise.

3 [10:38]And as they were pursuing their journey he entered into a
certain village. And a woman by the name of Martha received him into
her house. [10:39] And she had a sister called Mary, and she sat at the
feet of the Lord and heard his word. [10:40]But Martha was distracted
with much serving, and came and said, Lord, do you not care that my
sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her, therefore, to help me.
[10:41]And the Lord answered and said to her, Martha, Martha, you are
anxious and disturbed about many things, [10:42]but of one thing there
is need; and Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not be taken
away from her.

4 [11:1]And as he was in a certain place praying, when he ceased one of
his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught
his disciples. [11:2]And he said to them, When you pray, say, Father,
hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; [11:3]give us daily our
essential bread; [11:4]and forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also
forgive every one who is indebted to us; and bring us not into trial.

5 [11:5]And he said to them, Which of you shall have a friend, and go
to him at midnight, and say, Friend, lend me three loaves, [11:6]for a
friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set
before him; [11:7]and he will answer from within, and say, Trouble me
not, for the door is already shut, and my little children are with me
in bed, I cannot arise and give you; [11:8]I tell you if he will not
arise and give him on account of being his friend, yet, on account of
his importunity, he will arise and give him as many as he needs.
[11:9]And I tell you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you; [11:10]for every one
that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks,
it shall be opened. [11:11] And what father is there of you, who, if
his son asks for bread, will give him a stone? or if he asks also for a
fish, will for a fish give him a serpent? [11:12]or if he asks also for
an egg, will give him a scorpion? [11:13]If you then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall the Father
from heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.




CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST DEFENDS THE DIVINE CHARACTER OF HIS MIRACLES, AND DENOUNCES THE PHARISEES.


1 [11:14]AND he cast out a demon, and it was dumb. And when the demon
had gone out, the dumb spoke; and the multitudes wondered.  [11:15]But
some of them said, He casts out demons by Beelzebul, the ruler of
demons; [11:16]and others, trying him, asked of him a sign from heaven.
[11:17]But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom
divided against itself is desolated, and house falls upon house.
[11:18]And if Satan is divided against himself, how shall his kingdom
stand? because you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul. [11:19]But
if I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by whom do your sons cast them out?
they, therefore, shall be your judges. [11:20]But if by a finger of God
I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
[11:21]When a strong man armed keeps his court, his goods are in peace;
[11:22]but when a stronger man than he comes upon him, and overcomes
him, he takes away all his arms in which he trusted, and distributes
his spoils. [11:23]He that is not with me is against me; and he that
gathers not with me scatters.

2 [11:24]When an impure spirit has gone out of a man, it passes through
places destitute of water, seeking a rest; and not finding one, says, I
will return to my house from which I came out. [11:25]And coming, it
finds it swept and adorned.  [11:26]Then it goes and takes seven other
spirits more evil than itself; and they come and dwell there; and the
last condition of that man is worse than the first.

3 [11:27]And when he was saying these things, a certain woman from the
multitude lifted up her voice, and said to him, Blessed is the mother
that bore you, and the breasts which you nursed!  [11:28]And he said,
Yes indeed, blessed are those that hear the word of God and keep it.

4 [11:29]And multitudes being assembled, he said, This generation is an
evil generation. It seeks for a sign, and no sign shall be given it but
the sign of Jonah. [11:30]For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so
also shall the Son of man be to this generation. [11:31]The queen of
the south shall rise in the judgment with the men of this generation
and condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
[11:32]The men of Nineveh shall arise in the judgment with this
generation and condemn it; for they changed their minds at the
preaching of Jonah, and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.

5 [11:33]No one lights a candle and puts it in a secret place, or under
a modius [1.916 gallon measure], but on a candlestick, that all who go
in may see the light. [11:34]The light of the body is the eye; when,
therefore, your eye is sound, your whole body is light; but when your
eye is evil, your whole body is dark.  [11:35]See, therefore, that the
light which is in you be not darkness. [11:36]If, therefore, your whole
body is light, not having any part dark, the whole will be light, as
when a candle lights you clearly.

6 [11:37]And when he was speaking, a certain Pharisee asked him to
breakfast with him; and he went in and immediately sat down.
[11:38]And the Pharisee seeing him, wondered that he was not first
baptized before breakfast. [11:39] And the Lord said to him, Now you
Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and plate, but your inside is
full of plunder and wickedness.  [11:40]Senseless men! did not he that
made the outside make also the inside? [11:41]But give the things
within in charity, and behold, all things are pure to you.

7 [11:42]But woe to you, Pharisees! for you tithe mint, and rue, and
every kind of plant, and omit justice and the love of God.  These
things you ought to do, and not to omit those. [11:43]Woe to you,
Pharisees! for you love the first seat in the synagogues, and
salutations in the markets. [11:44]Woe to you! for you are like
concealed tombs; and men walk over them and know it not.

8 [11:45]And one of the lawyers answered and said to him, Teacher, in
saying these things you reproach us also. [11:46]And he said, Woe to
you, lawyers! for you load men with burdens difficult to be borne, and
you yourselves will not touch the burdens with one of your fingers.
[11:47]Woe to you! for you build the tombs of the prophets, and your
fathers killed them; [11:48]therefore you are witnesses, and approve
the deed of your fathers; for they killed them, and you build.
[11:49]Therefore also the wisdom of God said, I will send them prophets
and apostles, and some of them they shall kill and persecute, [11:50]
that the blood of all the prophets which has been poured out since the
foundation of the world may be required of this generation, [11:51]from
the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the
altar and the house. Yes, I tell you, it shall be required of this
generation. [11:52]Woe to you, lawyers! for you have taken away the key
of knowledge; you do not enter in yourselves, and you forbid those
entering.

9 [11:53]And when he had gone out thence the scribes and Pharisees were
extremely angry, and questioned him on many subjects, [11:54]watching
him, to catch something from his mouth.




CHAPTER XVII. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF HYPOCRISY, OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD, OF WORLDLY CARES, AND OF THE TIMES.


1 [12:1]AT that time, the multitude being assembled by ten thousands,
so that they trod one on another, he said to his disciples, Beware,
first, of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy; [12:2]for
there is nothing concealed that shall not be revealed, nor hid that
shall not be known. [12:3]Whatever, therefore, you have said in the
darkness, shall be heard in the light; and what you have spoken to the
ear in private rooms, shall be proclaimed on the houses. [12:4]And I
tell you, my friends, fear not those that kill the body, and after this
have [power] to do nothing more. [12:5]But I will show you whom to
fear; Fear him, who after killing has power to cast into hell; yes, I
tell you, Fear him. [12:6]Are not five sparrows sold for two assarions
[3 cents], and one of them is not forgotten before God? [12:7]But even
the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore, for you
are of more value than many sparrows.

2 [12:8]And I tell you, that whoever shall confess me before men, him
will the Son of man confess before the angels of God; [12:9]but he that
has denied me before men, shall be denied before the angels of God.
[12:10]And every one that speaks a word against the Son of man shall
have forgiveness; but he that blasphemes against the Holy Spirit shall
not be forgiven.  [12:11]And when they bring you to the synagogues, and
powers, and authorities, be not anxious how you shall defend
yourselves, or what you shall say; [12:12]for the Holy Spirit shall
teach you in that hour what you ought to say.

3 [12:13]And one of the multitude said to him, Teacher, tell my brother
to divide with me the inheritance. [12:14]And he said to him, Man, who
made me a judge or a divider over you? [12:15]And he said to them, See,
and beware of all covetousness; for one's life depends not on the
abundance of his property. [12:16]And he told them a parable, saying,
The farm of a certain rich man produced abundantly; [12:17]and he
reasoned in himself, saying, What shall I do, for I have no place where
I shall bring together my fruits? [12:18]And he said, I will do this; I
will take down my storehouses and build greater; and there will I bring
together all my produce and my goods; [12:19]and I will say to my soul,
Soul, you have many goods laid up for many years rest, eat, drink, and
enjoy yourself. [12:20]But God said to him, Foolish man, this night
they shall require your soul from you; and who then will have the goods
which you have provided? [12:21]So is every one that lays up treasures
for himself and is not rich in God.

4 [12:22]And he said to his disciples, I tell you, therefore, be not
anxious for your soul what you shall eat, nor for the body what you
shall put on. [12:23]Is not the soul more than the food, and the body
than the clothing? [12:24]Consider the ravens; for they neither sow nor
reap, and they have no private room, no storehouse; and God feeds them.
How much are you better than the birds! [12:25]And which of you can add
a cubit to his stature?  [12:26]And if you cannot do the least, why are
you anxious for the rest? [12:27]Consider the lilies; how they neither
spin nor weave; but I tell you that Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of them. [12:28]And if God so clothes the grass in the
field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, will he
not much more clothe you, men of little faith?  [12:29]And seek not
what you shall eat, and what you shall drink, and be not of a doubtful
mind; [12:30]for all these things do the nations of the world seek; and
your Father knows that you need them. [12:31]But seek his kingdom, and
these shall be added to you. [12:32]Fear not, little flock, for your
Father is well pleased to give you the kingdom. [12:33]Sell your
property and bestow charity; make yourselves purses that become not
old, and a treasury that fails not, in heaven, where no thief
approaches, nor moth destroys; [12:34]for where your treasury is, there
will your heart be also.

5 [12:35]Stand with your loins girded, and your candles lighted,
[12:36]and be like men waiting for the coming of their lord, when he
shall return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks they may
open to him immediately. [12:37] Blessed are those servants whom their
lord when he comes shall find watching. I tell you truly, that he will
gird himself, and cause them to recline, and he will come and wait upon
them. [12:38]And if he comes in the second watch, and comes in the
third watch, and finds them thus, blessed are they. [12:39]But know
this, that if the householder had known at what hour the thief comes,
he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken
through. [12:40]Be you also ready; for in an hour when you think not
the Son of man comes.

6 [12:41]And Peter said to him, Lord, do you speak this parable to us,
or also to all? [12:42]And the Lord said, Who then is a faithful, a
wise steward, whom the lord shall place over his family, to give them
their proper food in due time?  [12:43]Blessed is that servant whom his
lord when he comes shall find so doing. [12:44]I tell you truly, that
he will set him over all his property. [12:45]But if that servant says
in his heart, My lord delays to come, and begins to beat the younger
servants, and female servants, and to eat and drink and be drunk,
[12:46]the lord of that servant will come in a day that he looks not
for him, and at an hour that he knows not of, and will punish him
severely, and give him his part with the faithless.  [12:47]And that
servant who knew his lord's will and prepared not himself, nor did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; [12:48]but he
that knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with
few. And from any one to whom much is given, much will be demanded; and
of him with whom men have deposited much, they will ask more.

7 [12:49]I have come to send a fire on the earth; and what will I if it
is already kindled? [12:50]But I have a baptism to be baptized with;
and how am I straitened till it is fully accomplished! [12:51]Do you
think that I have come to give peace on the earth? I tell you, no; but
rather division. [12:52]For from this time there shall be five in one
house divided, three against two, and two shall be divided against
three; [12:53]a father against a son, and a son against a father; a
mother against the daughter, and a daughter against the mother; a
mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law, and a daughter-in-law
against the mother-in-law.

8 [12:54]And he also said to the multitudes, When you see a cloud rise
in the west you immediately say, There comes a shower; and it is so.
[12:55]And when the south wind blows you say, There will be heat; and
there is. [12:56] Hypocrites! You know how to distinguish the
appearance of the earth and sky, and how do you not distinguish this
time? [12:57]And why even of yourselves do you not judge what is right?
[12:58]For when you go with your adversary to a ruler, on the way labor
to be released from him, lest he take you to the judge, and the judge
deliver you to the officer, and the officer cast you into prison;
[12:59] I tell you that you shall not go out thence till you have paid
even the last lepton [2 mill].




CHAPTER XVIII. CHRIST COMMENTING ON THE SLAUGHTER OF CERTAIN GALILEANS, CURING A DEMONIAC ON THE SABBATH, THE SAVED, ETC.


1 [13:1]AND some were present at that time, telling him of the
Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices.  [13:2]And
he answered and said to them, Do you think those Galileans were sinners
above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? [13:3]I
tell you, No; but unless you change your minds you shall all in like
manner be destroyed. [13:4]Or those eighteen on whom the tower in the
Siloam fell, and killed them; do you think they were sinners above all
men that live at Jerusalem? [13:5]I tell you, No; but unless you change
your minds you shall all in like manner be destroyed.

2 [13:6]And he spoke this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.
[13:7]And he said to his vine dresser, Behold, I have come three years
seeking fruit on this fig tree and find none; cut it down; why should
it make the ground unproductive? [13:8] And he answered and said to
him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I dig about it, and put on
manure; [13:9]and if it bears fruit, well; but if not, at a future time
you shall cut it down.

3 [13:10]And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath,
[13:11] and behold, there was a woman who had been subject to a spirit
of infirmity eighteen years, and was bent down, and was not able to
lift herself up at all. [13:12]And Jesus seeing her, called to her and
said, Woman, you are released from your infirmity; [13:13]and he put
his hands on her, and immediately she was made straight, and glorified
God. [13:14]And the synagogue ruler answered, being angry because Jesus
had performed a cure on the sabbath, and said to the multitude, There
are six days in which you ought to work; in them, therefore, come and
be cured, and not on the sabbath. [13:15]Then the Lord answered him and
said, Hypocrites, does not each of you on the sabbath untie his ox or
his ass from the manger, and lead him away to drink? [13:16]And ought
not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound,
behold, eighteen years, to be released from this bond on the sabbath?
[13:17]And when he had said these things all his enemies were ashamed;
and all the people rejoiced on account of all the glorious works
performed by him.

4 [13:18]And he said, What is the kingdom of God like? and to what
shall I liken it? [13:19]It is like a mustard seed which a man took and
cast into his garden; and it grew and became a great tree, and the
birds of heaven lodged in its branches.  [13:20]Again he said, To what
shall I liken the kingdom of God?  [13:21]It is like leaven which a
woman took and hid in three sata [33 quarts] of flour, till the whole
was leavened.

5 [13:22]And he went through the cities and villages teaching, and
making his way towards Jerusalem. [13:23]And some one said to him,
Lord, are there few who are saved? And he said to them, [13:24]Strive
to enter in by the narrow gate; for many, I tell you, shall seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. [13:25] When the householder has risen
and shut the door, and you stand without and knock at the door, saying,
Lord, open to us, and he will answer and say to you, I know you not
whence you are, [13:26]then you will say, We eat and drank in your
presence, and you have taught in our streets; [13:27]and he will say to
you, I know not whence you are; depart from me, all doers of
wickedness.  [13:28] There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when
you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in
the kingdom of God, and you cast out. [13:29]And they shall come from
the east and west, and from the north and south, and shall recline in
the kingdom of God. [13:30]And behold, there are last who shall be
first, and there are first who shall be last.

6 [13:31]On the same day some of the Pharisees came to him, saying, Go
out and depart hence, for Herod wishes to kill you.  [13:32]And he said
to them, Go and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out demons, and finish
[performing] cures to-day and to-morrow, and on the third day I shall
finish my course. [13:33]But I must go on to-day and to-morrow, and the
day following; for it is not possible for a prophet to be destroyed out
of Jerusalem.  [13:34]Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets and
stoning those sent to her, how often would I have gathered your
children together, as a bird gathers her young under her wings, and you
would not! [13:35]Behold, your house is left to you. And I tell you,
that you shall not see me, till [the day] shall come when you shall
say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.




CHAPTER XIX. CHRIST DINING WITH A RULER ON THE SABBATH, THE PARABLE OF THE GREAT SUPPER, QUALIFICATIONS FOR DISCIPLESHIP.


1 [14:1]AND he came into the house of one of the rulers of the
Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath; and they watched him closely.
[14:2]And behold, there was a man before him having the dropsy.
[14:3]And Jesus answered and said to the lawyers and Pharisees, Is it
lawful to cure on the sabbath, or not? [14:4]And they were silent. And
he took and cured him, and dismissed him.  [14:5]And he answered and
said to them, If a son or an ox of any of you shall fall into a pit,
will he not immediately take him out on the sabbath day? [14:6]And they
could not answer to these things.

2 [14:7]And he spoke a parable to the invited, when he observed how
they selected the first places at the table; saying to them, [14:8]When
you are invited by any one to a wedding, do not sit down in the first
place, lest at some time a more honorable man than you should have been
invited by him, [14:9] and he that invited you and him come and say to
you, Give this man a place; and then with shame you take the last
place. [14:10]But when you are invited, go and sit down in the last
place, that when he who invited you comes, he may say to you, Friend,
go up higher; then you shall have honor in the presence of those that
recline with you; [14:11]for every one that exalts himself shall be
humbled, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

3 [14:12]And he said also to him that had invited him, When you make a
breakfast, or a supper, call not your friends, nor your brothers, nor
your relatives, nor your rich neighbors, lest they also at some time
invite you in return, and a compensation be made to you. [14:13]But
when you make a feast, invite the poor, crippled, lame, blind,
[14:14]and you shall be blessed; for they cannot compensate you; for
you shall be compensated at the resurrection of the just.

4 [14:15]And one of those reclining with him, hearing these things,
said to him, Blessed is he that eats bread in the kingdom of God.
[14:16]And he said to him, A certain man made a great supper, and
invited many. [14:17]And he sent his servant at the time of the supper
to say to the invited, Come, for all things are now ready. [14:18]And
they all with one consent excused themselves. The first said to him, I
have bought a field and I must go to see it; I pray you have me
excused. [14:19]And another said, I have bought five yokes of oxen and
I go to try them; I pray you have me excused. [14:20]And another said,
I have married a wife, and on this account I cannot come. [14:21]And
the servant came and reported to his lord these things. Then the master
of the house; being angry, said to his servant, Go out quickly into the
streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and
maimed, and blind, and lame. [14:22]And the servant said, Lord, it is
done as you commanded, and yet there is room.  [14:23]And the Lord said
to the servant, Go out into the ways and along the hedges, and compel
them to come in, that my house may be filled; [14:24]for I tell you
that none of those men that were invited shall taste of my supper.

5 [14:25]And great multitudes were travelling with him; and turning
around he said to them, [14:26]If any one comes to me, and hates not
his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and
sisters, and still more his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
[14:27]And whoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot
be my disciple. [14:28]For what man of you wishing to build a tower,
does not first sit down and estimate the expense, whether he has the
means to finish?  [14:29]lest having laid its foundation, and not being
able to finish, all who see ridicule him, [14:30]saying, This man began
to build and was not able to finish. [14:31]Or what king going to
engage in war with another king, does not first sit down and consult
whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him
with twenty thousand? [14:32]And if not, while he is yet a great way
off, sending an embassy he desires conditions of peace. [14:33]So,
therefore, no one of you can be my disciple who does not forsake all
that he has. [14:34]Salt, therefore, is good; but if the salt has lost
its strength, with what shall it be seasoned? [14:35] It is not fit for
land, nor for manure; they cast it away. He that has ears to hear, let
him hear.




CHAPTER XX. PARABLES OF THE LOST SHEEP, THE LOST MONEY, AND THE PRODIGAL SON.


1 [15:1]AND all the publicans and sinners came near him to hear him.
[15:2]And both the Pharisees and scribes complained, saying, This man
receives sinners and eats with them. [15:3]And he spoke to them this
parable; saying, [15:4]What man of you having a hundred sheep, and
losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness,
and go after the lost sheep till he finds it. [15:5]And finding it, he
puts it on his shoulders rejoicing; [15:6]and coming to the house, he
calls together his friends and neighbors, saying, Congratulate me; for
I have found my sheep that was lost. [15:7]So, I tell you, there shall
be joy in heaven over one sinner that changes his mind, more than over
ninety-nine righteous persons who do not need a change of mind.

2 [15:8]Or what woman having ten drachmas [140 cents], if she loses one
drachma [14 cents], does not light a candle, and sweep the house, and
seek carefully till she finds it? [15:9]And when she finds it, she
calls her female friends and neighbors together, saying, Congratulate
me, for I have found the drachma which I lost. [15:10]So, I tell you,
there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner that changes his
mind.

3 [15:11]And he said, A certain man had two sons. [15:12]And the
youngest of them said to the father, Father, give me the portion of the
estate that falls to me; and he divided to them his living. [15:13]And
not many days after, the youngest son, collecting all his property,
went abroad to a distant country; and there wasted his property, living
intemperately. [15:14]And when he had spent all, there was a severe
famine in that country; and he began to be in want. [15:15]And he went
and attached himself to one of the citizens of that country; and he
sent him into his field to feed swine. [15:16]And he desired to fill
his stomach with the carob pods which the swine eat; and no man gave
him.

4 [15:17]And coming to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my
father abound in bread, but I perish here with hunger!  [15:18]I will
arise and go to my father, and say to him, Father, I have sinned to
Heaven, and before you; [15:19]I am no longer worthy to be called your
son; make me as one of your hired servants. [15:20]And he arose, and
came to his father. But while he was yet far off, his father saw him,
and had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed
him. [15:21]And the son said to him, Father, I have sinned to Heaven,
and before you; I am no longer worthy to be called your son. [15:22]
But the father said to his servants, Bring out the best robe and put on
him; and put a ring on his hand, and sandals on his feet; [15:23]and
bring the fatted calf and kill it; let us eat, and rejoice; [15:24]for
this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.
And they began to rejoice.

5 [15:25]But his older son was in the field; and when he came and
approached the house he heard music and the dancers. [15:26]And calling
one of the servants he inquired what these things meant.  [15:27]And he
said to him, Your brother has come; and your father has killed the
fatted calf, because he has received him back in health. [15:28]And he
was angry, and would not go in; but his father came out and entreated
him. [15:29]And he answered and said to his father, Behold, I have
served you so many years, and have never disobeyed your command; and
you have never given me a kid, that I might rejoice with my friends;
[15:30]but when this your son came who has consumed his living with
harlots, you killed for him the fatted calf. [15:31]But he said to him,
Son, you are always with me, and all mine is yours. [15:32]We ought
also to rejoice and be glad; for this your brother was dead, and is
alive again; and was lost, and is found.




CHAPTER XXI. THE UNFAITHFUL STEWARD, AND THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS.


1 [16:1]AND he also said to the disciples, There was a certain rich man
that had a steward; and he was accused to him of wasting his property.
[16:2]And calling him, he said to him, What is this which I hear of
you? Render an account of your stewardship; for you can be no longer a
steward. [16:3]And the steward said within himself, What shall I do,
because my lord takes the stewardship away from me? I am not strong
enough to dig; I am ashamed to beg.  [16:4]I know what I will do, that
when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their
houses. [16:5]And calling each one of his lord's debtors, he said to
the first, How much do you owe my lord? [16:6]And he said, A hundred
baths [1,350 gallons] of oil. And he said to him, Take your bill, and
sit down quickly, and write fifty. [16:7]Then he said to another, And
how much do you owe? And he said, A hundred cors [1,445 bushels] of
wheat. And he said to him, Take your bill, and write eighty. [16:8]And
the lord praised the unjust steward, because he did wisely; for the
children of this life are wiser, for their generation, than the
children of light.

2 [16:9]And I tell you, Make yourselves friends of the riches procured
by injustice, that when it fails they may receive you into the eternal
tabernacles. [16:10]He that is faithful in the least is faithful also
in much; and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.
[16:11]If, therefore, you have not been faithful in the riches procured
by injustice, who will commit to you the true? [16:12]And if you have
not been faithful in another's, who will give you yours? [16:13]No
domestic can serve two masters; for he will either hate the first and
love the other, or he will adhere to the first and despise the other.
You cannot serve God and riches.

3 [16:14]And the Pharisees, who are avaricious, heard all these things,
and derided him. [16:15]And he said to them, You are they that justify
yourselves before men; but God knows your hearts; for that which is
high among men is an abomination before God.  [16:16]The law and the
prophets were till John; since that time the kingdom of God is
preached, and every one presses violently into it. [16:17]And it is
easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one point of the law
to fail. [16:18]Every one that puts away his wife and marries another,
commits adultery; and he that marries a woman put away from a husband,
commits adultery.

4 [16:19]There was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and
fine linen, and feasted sumptuously every day.  [16:20]And a certain
poor man by the name of Lazarus was laid at his gate, afflicted with
ulcers, [16:21]and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from
the rich man's table; but the dogs also came and licked his ulcers.
[16:22]And the poor man died, and was carried away by the angels to
Abraham's bosom. And the rich man also died, and was buried; [16:23]and
in hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and saw Abraham from
afar, and Lazarus in his bosom. [16:24]And he called and said, Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his
finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am in pain in this flame.

5 [16:25]But Abraham said, Son, remember that you received your good
things in your life, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he
is comforted here, and you are in pain. [16:26]And besides all this,
there is a great chasm fixed between us and you, so that those wishing
to pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass from thence to
us. [16:27]And he said, I beseech you then, father, send him to my
father's house, [16:28]for I have five brothers, to testify fully to
them, that they may not also come to this place of torment [16:29]But
Abraham said, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.
[16:30]But he said, No, father Abraham, but if one went to them from
the dead they would change their minds. [16:31]But he said to him, If
they hear not Moses and the prophets, they would not be persuaded if
one arose from the dead.




CHAPTER XXII. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE RESPECTING OFFENSES, CURING TEN LEPERS, AND PREDICTING THE COMING OF HIS KINGDOM.


1 [17:1]AND he said to his disciples, It is inevitable that offenses
should come; but woe to him by whom they come; [17:2]it would be
profitable for him if a millstone was placed around his neck, and he
was cast into the sea, rather than that he should offend one of these
little ones. [17:3]Take heed to yourselves; if your brother sins,
reprove him; and if he changes his mind, forgive him; [17:4]and if he
sins against you seven times in a day, and turn seven times, saying, I
change my mind, you shall forgive him.

2 [17:5]And the apostles said to the Lord, Increase our faith.
[17:6]And the Lord said, If you had a faith like a mustard seed, you
would say to this sycamore tree, Be taken up by the roots and planted
in the sea, and it would obey you. [17:7]But which of you having a
servant plowing, or keeping sheep, will say to him when he comes in
from the field, Come immediately and sit down?  [17:8]but will he not
say to him, Prepare something that I may take supper, and gird yourself
and wait on me till I eat and drink, and after that do you eat and
drink? [17:9]Does he thank the servant because he did the things
commanded him? [17:10]So also you, when you have done all things
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants; what we owed the
doing of; we have done.

3 [17:11]And he was going to Jerusalem, and he passed through the midst
of Samaria and Galilee. [17:12]And coming to a certain village, ten
lepers met him, who stood afar off. [17:13]And they lifted up their
voice saying, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.  [17:14]And seeing them,
he said, Go and show yourselves to the priests. And as they were going
they were cleansed. [17:15] And one of them seeing that he was cured,
returned, glorifying God with a loud voice, [17:16]and fell on his face
at his feet and thanked him. And he was a Samaritan. [17:17]And Jesus
answered and said to him, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are
the nine? [17:18]There are not found returning to give glory to God any
but this stranger. [17:19]And he said to him, Arise and go; your faith
has cured you.

4 [17:20]And being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God
comes, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God comes not with
observation; [17:21] neither shall they say, Behold here!  or, there!
for behold, the kingdom of God is within you.  [17:22]And he said to
the disciples, The days will come when you shall desire to see one of
the days of the Son of man, and shall not see it. [17:23]And they shall
say to you, Behold there!  behold here! go not away, nor follow them.
[17:24]For as the lightning flashing from one part under heaven shines
to another part under heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his day.
[17:25]But first he must suffer many things, and be rejected by this
generation. [17:26]And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be
also in the days of the Son of man. [17:27]They eat, they drank, they
married, they were married, till the day that Noah entered into the
ark, and the flood came and destroyed all.  [17:28]In like manner also
as it was in the days of Lot; they eat, drank, bought, sold, planted,
built; [17:29]but on the day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire
and sulphur from heaven, and destroyed all; [17:30]so shall it be in
the day when the Son of man is revealed.

5 [17:31]In that day let not him that shall be on the house, and his
furniture in the house, come down to take it away; and in like manner
let not him in the field turn back for things which are behind;
[17:32]remember Lot's wife. [17:33]Whoever shall seek to save his life
shall lose it; and whoever shall lose shall save it. [17:34]I tell you,
on that night two shall be on one bed; one shall be taken and the other
left; [17:35]two shall be grinding together; one shall be taken and the
other left. [17:37]And they answered and said to him, Where, Lord? And
he said to them, Where the body is, there will the eagles be gathered
together.




CHAPTER XXIII. THE PARABLE OF THE UNJUST JUDGE, INFANTS, AND THE WAY OF SALVATION.


1 [18:1]AND he spoke also a parable to them, that men ought to pray at
all times, and not to faint; [18:2]saying, There was a certain judge in
a certain city, who feared not God and regarded not man. [18:3]And
there was a widow in that city, and she came to him, saying, Give me
judgment against my adversary. [18:4]And he would not for a time; but
afterwards he said within himself, Though I fear not God and regard not
man, [18:5]yet because this widow makes me trouble I will give her
judgment, that she may not vex me by her continual coming. [18:6]And
the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge says. [18:7]And will not God
execute the judgment of his elect, who cry day and night to him, even
though he waits long on them? [18:8]I tell you, he will execute their
judgment speedily. But when the Son of man comes will he find faith on
the earth?

2 [18:9]And he also spoke this parable to some who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and despised others: [18:10]Two
men went up to the temple to pray; one a Pharisee, and the other a
publican. [18:11]The Pharisee, standing by himself, offered this
prayer; God, I thank thee that I am not as other men, rapacious,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican; [18:12]I fast twice a
week; I tithe all I acquire. [18:13]And the publican, standing afar
off, would not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote on his breast,
saying, God, be propitious to me a sinner. [18:14]I tell you this man
went down to his house justified rather than that; for every one that
exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

3 [18:15]And they brought him also infants, that he should touch them;
and the disciples seeing it reproved them. [18:16]But Jesus calling
them, said, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them
not; for of such is the kingdom of God. [18:17]I tell you truly, that
whoever receives not the kingdom of God as a little child, shall by no
means enter into it.

4 [18:18]And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good teacher, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life? [18:19]And Jesus said to him, Why
do you call me good? There is none good but one, God.  [18:20]You know
the commandments; You shall not commit adultery, You shall not kill,
You shall not steal, You shall not testify falsely, Honor your father
and your mother. [18:21]And he said, All these have I kept from my
youth. [18:22]And Jesus hearing it, said to him, One thing you yet
want; sell all that you have, and distribute to the poor, and you shall
have a treasure in heaven, and come, follow me. [18:23]And when he
heard these things he was sad; for he was very rich. [18:24]And Jesus
seeing him, said, With what difficulty do those who have riches enter
into the kingdom of God! [18:25]It is easier for a camel to enter
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. [18:26]And those hearing him, said, And who can be
saved? [18:27]And he said, Things impossible with man are possible with
God.

5 [18:28]And Peter said, Behold, we have left our [property] and
followed you. [18:29]And he said to them, I tell you truly, that there
is no one who has left a house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or
children, on account of the kingdom of God, [18:30]who shall not
receive manifold more in this time, and in the life to come eternal
life.




CHAPTER XXIV. CHRIST PREDICTING HIS DEATH, GIVING SIGHT TO A BLIND MAN, STOPPING WITH ZACCHEUS, AND THE PARABLE OF THE NOBLEMAN RECEIVING A KINGDOM.


1 [18:31]AND Jesus took the twelve aside, and said to them, Behold, we
go up to Jerusalem; and all things written by the prophets concerning
the Son of man will be finished. [18:32]For he will be delivered to the
Gentiles, and be mocked, and injuriously treated, and spit upon,
[18:33]and they will scourge and kill him, and on the third day he will
rise again. [18:34]And they understood nothing of these things; and
this word was concealed from them, and they did not perceive what was
said.

2 [18:35]And when they came nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man sat by
the way, begging. [18:36]And hearing the multitude passing by he
inquired what it meant. [18:37]And they told him, Jesus the Nazoraean
is passing by. [18:38]And he cried, saying, Jesus, Son of David, have
mercy on me. [18:39]And those going before charged him to be still; but
he cried much more, Son of David, have mercy on me. [18:40]And Jesus
stopping, commanded him to be brought to him. And when he came near he
asked him, [18:41]saying, What do you wish me to do for you? And he
said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. [18:42]And Jesus said to him,
Receive your sight; your faith has cured you. [18:43]And he immediately
received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God; and all the
people seeing it gave praise to God.

3 [19:1]And entering into Jericho he passed through it. [19:2]And
behold, there was a man called Zaccheus, and he was chief publican, and
was rich. [19:3] And he sought to see Jesus, who he was; and could not
on account of the multitude, because he was of small stature. [19:4]And
running before, he went up on a sycamore that he might see him; for he
was to pass by it. [19:5]And when he came to the place, Jesus looking
up saw him, and said to him, Zaccheus, make haste and come down, for
to-day I must stop at your house; [19:6]and he made haste and came
down, and received him rejoicing. [19:7]And seeing it, they all
complained, saying, He has gone in to stop with a sinner.

4 [19:8]And Zaccheus stood up and said to the Lord, Behold, half of my
property, Lord, I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded any one of
any thing, I restore fourfold. [19:9]And Jesus said to him, To-day has
salvation come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham;
[19:10]for the Son of man has come to seek and save the lost.

5 [19:11]And when they were hearing these things, he added and spoke a
parable, because he was nigh Jerusalem; and they thought that the
kingdom of God was immediately to appear. [19:12]He said, therefore, A
certain nobleman went into a distant country to receive a kingdom for
himself, and to return. [19:13]And calling his ten servants, he gave
them ten minas [$163.30], and said to them, Use them in business till I
come. [19:14]And his citizens hated him, and sent an embassy after him,
saying, We wish not this man to reign over us. [19:15]And he returned,
having received the kingdom, and ordered those servants to be called to
him to whom he had given the money, that he might know what each one
had done.

6 [19:16]And the first came, saying, Lord, your mina [$16.33] has
gained ten minas. [19:17]And he said to him, Well, good servant;
because you have been faithful in the least, have authority over ten
cities. [19:18]And the second came, saying, Lord, your mina has made
five minas. [19:19]And he said to him, Be you over five cities.
[19:20]And the other came, saying, Lord, behold your mina, which I had
laid up in a napkin; [19:21]for I feared you, because you are an
austere man; you take up what you laid not down, and reap what you did
not sow. [19:22]He said to him, Out of your mouth will I judge you,
evil servant. You knew that I am an austere man, taking up what I laid
not down, and reaping what I did not sow? [19:23]then why did you not
put my silver on the [broker's] table, and when I came I should have
had the same, with interest? [19:24]And he said to those standing by,
Take from him the mina, and give it to him that has ten minas,--
[19:25]and they said to him, Lord, he has ten minas,-- [19:26]for I
tell you, that to every one that has shall be given; but from him that
has not, even what he has shall be taken away; [19:27]but those my
enemies that wished me not to reign over them, bring hither and kill
them before me.




CHAPTER XXV. CHRIST ENTERING JERUSALEM, AND PURIFYING THE TEMPLE.


1 [19:28]AND having said these things he went forward going up to
Jerusalem. [19:29]And when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany, at
the mountain called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
[19:30]saying, Go into the village opposite to you, and having entered
into it you will find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat; untie and
bring him; [19:31]and if any one asks you, Why do you untie him? Say
thus to him; The Lord has need of him. [19:32]And those sent, going,
found as he said to them.  [19:33]And untying the colt, his owners said
to them, Why do you untie the colt? [19:34]And they said, The Lord has
need of him.  [19:35]And they brought him to Jesus; and spreading their
clothes on the colt they put Jesus on him. [19:36]And as he proceeded
they spread their clothes in the way. [19:37]And when he was now
approaching, at the descent of the Mount of Olives, all the multitude
of the disciples began to rejoice, and praise God with a loud voice for
all the mighty works which they saw, [19:38]saying, Blessed is the king
who comes in the name of the Lord; peace be in heaven, and glory in the
highest [heavens].  [19:39]And some of the Pharisees, from the
multitude, said to him, Teacher, rebuke your disciples. [19:40]And he
answered and said to them, I tell you that if these should be silent
the stones would cry out.

2 [19:41]And when he came near and saw the city he wept over it,
[19:42] saying, O, that you had known, even you, and indeed in this
your day, the things which are for your peace! But now they are hid
from your eyes. [19:43]For days of [trouble] will come upon you, and
your enemies shall throw an embankment around you, and shut you in, and
press you on every side, [19:44]and destroy you and your children with
you, and not leave stone upon stone in you; because you knew not the
time of your visitation.

3 [19:45]And going into the temple he cast out those that sold,
[19:46]saying to them, it is written, My house shall be a house of
prayer; but you have made it a den of robbers.




CHAPTER XXVI. CHRIST IN THE TEMPLE REPLYING TO THE PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES.


1 [19:47]AND he taught daily in the temple; and the chief priests, and
scribes, and the first of the people sought to destroy him. [19:48]And
they found nothing that they could do; for all the people were
attentive to hear him. [20:1]And on one of those days, as he was
teaching the people in the temple, and proclaiming the good news, the
chief priests and scribes, with the elders, came upon him, [20:2]and
spoke to him saying, Tell us by what authority you do these things? and
who gave you this authority? [20:3]And he answered and said to them, I
also will ask you a question; and tell me, [20:4]Was the baptism of
John from heaven, or from men? [20:5]And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we say, From heaven, he will say, Why did you not believe
him? [20:6]But if we say, From men, all the people will stone us; for
they are persuaded that John is a prophet. [20:7]And they answered,
They did not know whence.  [20:8]And Jesus said to them, Neither do I
tell you by what authority I do these things.

2 [20:9]And he spoke to the people this parable; A man planted a
vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad for a long
time. [20:10]And at the time he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that
they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard; and the husbandmen
beat him, and sent him away empty. [20:11] And again he sent another
servant; and they beat him, and treated him shamefully, and sent him
away empty. [20:12]And again he sent a third; and they wounded him, and
cast him out. [20:13]And the lord of the vineyard said, What shall I
do? I will send my beloved son; doubtless, when they see him they will
respect him.  [20:14]But seeing him, the husbandmen reasoned with
themselves, saying, This is the heir; let us kill him, that the
inheritance may be ours. [20:15]And they cast him out of the vineyard,
and killed him. What, therefore, will the lord of the vineyard do to
them? [20:16]He will come and destroy those husbandmen, and let the
vineyard to others. And hearing this, they said, By no means.
[20:17]And he looked at them and said, What, then, is this which is
written? The stone which the builders rejected has become the head of a
corner; [20:18]every one that falls on that stone shall be bruised; but
on whomsoever it shall fall it shall crush him to atoms. [20:19]And the
scribes and chief priests sought to lay hands on him at that time; and
they feared the people; for they knew that he spoke this parable to
them.

3 [20:20]And they sent spies to watch him, who pretended to be
righteous men, that they might take advantage of his speech, to deliver
him to the power and authority of the procurator.  [20:21]And they
asked him saying, Teacher, we know that you speak and teach correctly,
and respect no person, but teach the way of God in truth. [20:22]Is it
lawful for us to pay tribute to Caesar, or not? [20:23]And perceiving
their craftiness, he said to them, [20:24]Show me a denarius [14
cents]. Whose figure and inscription has it? And they answered and
said, Caesar's.  [20:25]And he said to them, Render therefore Caesar's
dues to Caesar, and God's to God. [20:26]And they were not able to take
advantage of his word before the people; and they wondered at his
answer, and were silent.

4 [20:27]And some of the Sadducees came forward, who deny that there is
a resurrection, and asked him, [20:28]saying, Teacher, Moses wrote to
us, that if one's brother dies, having a wife, and dies childless, his
brother shall take his wife and raise up children for his brother.
[20:29]There were, therefore, seven brothers; and the first took a
wife, and died childless; [20:30]and the second and third took her;
[20:31]and in like manner also the seven; [and they] left no children,
and died.  [20:32]And last, the woman died also. [20:33]In the
resurrection, therefore, which of them has her for a wife? for the
seven had her for a wife. [20:34]And Jesus said to them, The children
of this life marry and are married; [20:35]but those who are judged
worthy to attain that life, and the resurrection of the dead, neither
marry nor are married; [20:36]neither can they die any more; for they
are equal to the angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the
resurrection. [20:37]But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at
the bush, when he called the Lord, The God of Abraham, and God of
Isaac, and God of Jacob.  [20:38]But God is not [a God] of the dead,
but of the living; for all live to him. [20:39]And some of the scribes
answered and said, Teacher, you have spoken well. [20:40]And they dared
not question him any more.

5 [20:41]And he said to them, How do they say that the Christ is the
son of David? [20:42]And David himself says in the book of Psalms, The
Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my right hand, [20:43]till I make your
enemies your footstool. [20:44]David, therefore, calls him Lord; and
how is he his son?

6 [20:45]And in the hearing of all the people he said to them,
[20:46]Beware of the scribes, who delight to walk in long robes, and
love salutations in the markets, and the first seats in the synagogues,
and the first places at feasts; [20:47]who devour widows' houses, and
for a pretence make long prayers; they shall receive a greater judgment.

7 [21:1]And looking up he saw the rich casting their gifts into the
treasury. [21:2]And he saw also a certain poor widow cast in there two
lepta [4 mills]. [21:3]And he said, I tell you truly, that this poor
widow has cast in more than all; [21:4]for all these have cast among
the gifts from their abundance; but she from her want has cast in all
the living she had.




CHAPTER XXVII. CHRIST PREDICTING THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM AND HIS OWN EXALTATION.


1 [21:5]AND some speaking of the temple, that it was adorned with
beautiful stones and votive offerings, he said, [21:6]As to these
things which you see, the days will come in which stone shall not be
left upon stone that shall not be thrown down. [21:7]And they asked
him, saying, Teacher, when then shall these things be? and what sign
[shall there be], when these things are about to occur?  [21:8]And he
said, See that you be not deceived; for many shall come in my name,
saying, I am [Christ], and the time is at hand; go not after them.
[21:9] And when you hear of wars and insurrections, be not terrified,
for these things must be first; but the end is not immediately.

2 [21:10]Then said he to them, Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; [21:11]and in places there shall be great
earthquakes, and famines, and pestilences; and there shall also be
fearful sights and great signs from heaven. [21:12]But before all these
things they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, committing
you to synagogues and prisons, to be brought before kings and governors
on my account; [21:13]and it shall result to you for a testimony.
[21:14]Settle it in your minds, therefore, not to premeditate what
defense you shall make, [21:15]for I will give you a mouth and wisdom
which all your enemies shall not be able to resist or dispute.
[21:16]And you shall be delivered up by parents, and brothers, and
relatives, and friends; and they shall kill some of you; [21:17]and you
shall be hated by all on my account; [21:18]and a hair of your heads
shall by no means perish; [21:19]by your patience you shall save your
souls.

3 [21:20]But when you see Jerusalem surrounded with encampments, then
know that its desolation is at hand. [21:21]Then let those in Judea
flee to the mountains; and those in the midst of it depart out of it;
and let those in country places not enter into it. [21:22]For these are
days of judgment, that all things which are written may be fully
accomplished. [21:23]But woe to those with child, and having children
at the breast in those days; for there shall be great distress on the
earth, and wrath against this people. [21:24]And they shall fall by the
edge of the sword, and be carried away captive to all nations, and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down by gentiles, till the times of gentiles
are fully accomplished.

4 [21:25]And there shall be signs in the sun, and moon, and stars; and
on the earth distress of nations, with perplexity [at] the roaring of
the sea and waves, [21:26]men dying with fear and an expectation of
evils to come on the world; for the hosts of the heavens shall be
shaken. [21:27]And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud
with power and great glory.  [21:28]When these things begin to occur,
arise and lift up your heads, for your redemption is near.

5 [21:29]And he spoke to them a parable; See the fig tree and all the
trees; [21:30]when they now put forth, observing you know of yourselves
that summer already is nigh; [21:31]so, also, when you see all these
things occur, know that the kingdom of God is nigh.  [21:32]I tell you
truly, that this generation shall by no means pass away till all these
things are accomplished. [21:33] Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my words shall not pass away.  [21:34]Take heed to yourselves, that
your hearts be not oppressed with revelling and drunkenness, and
worldly cares, and that day come upon you suddenly; [21:35]for it shall
come like a snare on all who live on the face of the whole earth.
[21:36]But watch continually, praying that you may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things which are about to occur, and to stand
before the Son of man.

6 [21:37]And he taught during the days in the temple, and went out and
spent the nights on the mountain called the Mount of Olives. [21:38]And
all the people came early to him in the temple to hear him.




CHAPTER XXVIII. JUDAS AGREES TO BETRAY HIS MASTER, THE LAST SUPPER, AMBITION DISCOURAGED, THE DISCIPLES WARNED.


1 [22:1]AND the feast of unleavened bread approached, called the
passover. [22:2]And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might
destroy him, for they feared the people. [22:3]And Satan entered into
Judas, called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve; [22:4]and
he went and conferred with the chief priests and commanders as to how
he might deliver him to them. [22:5]And they were glad, and agreed to
give him money. [22:6]And he promised, and sought a convenient
opportunity to betray him to them in the absence of the people.

2 [22:7]And the day of unleavened bread came, in which it was necessary
to kill the paschal lamb. [22:8]And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go,
prepare for us the passover, that we may eat.  [22:9]And they said to
him, Where do you wish us to prepare?  [22:10]And he said to them,
Behold, as you enter into the city, a man will meet you, bearing an
earthen vessel of water; follow him into the house where he enters,
[22:11]and say to the master of the house, The teacher says to you,
where is the public room in which I may eat the passover with my
disciples? [22:12]And he will show you a large upper room furnished;
there prepare.  [22:13]And they went and found as he had said to them
and prepared the passover.

3 [22:14]And when the hour had come, he sat down, and the apostles with
him; [22:15]and he said to them, I have greatly desired to eat this
passover with you before I suffer; [22:16]for I tell you that I will
eat it no more till it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God. [22:17]And
taking a cup, he gave thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among
you; [22:18]for I tell you that I will not drink of the product of the
vine, till the kingdom of God has come. [22:19] And taking bread, and
giving thanks, he broke and gave them, saying, This is my body given
for you; this do in remembrance of me. [22:20]And the cup in like
manner, after supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant [sealed]
with my blood, which is poured out for you. [22:21]But behold, the hand
of the traitor is with me on the table; [22:22]for the Son of man goes
as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed.
[22:23]And they inquired among themselves which of them it was who was
about to do this.

4 [22:24]And there was a contention among them as to which of them
should be the greatest. [22:25]And he said to them, The kings of the
nations exercise lordship over them; and those having power are called
their benefactors. [22:26] But you shall not be so. But let the greater
among you be as the younger, and the chief as he that serves.
[22:27]For which is greater, he that reclines, or he that serves? Is
not he that reclines? But I am with you as he that serves. [22:28]And
you have continued with me in my trials, [22:29]and I appoint you, as
my Father has appointed me, a kingdom, [22:30]that you may eat and
drink at my table, in my kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.

5 [22:31]Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired you, to sift like
wheat; [22:32]but I have prayed for you, that your faith may not
entirely fail; and when you recover yourself, confirm your brothers.
[22:33]And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison
and to death. [22:34]And he said, I tell you, Peter, a cock shall not
crow today, before you shall deny thrice that you know me.

6 [22:35]And he said to them, When I sent you out without a purse, and
provision sack, and sandals, did you want any thing?  And they said,
Nothing. [22:36]Then he said to them, But now let him that has a purse
take it, and a provision sack likewise; and he that has not a sword,
let him sell his cloak and buy one.  [22:37]For I tell you, that this
which is written must be fully accomplished in me, And he was numbered
with transgressors; for also the things concerning me have an end.
[22:38]And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to
them, It is sufficient.




CHAPTER XXIX. CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE AND BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM.


1 [22:39]AND going out, he went, according to his custom to the Mount
of Olives; and the disciples followed him. [22:40]And arriving at the
place, he said to them, Pray that you may not enter into trial.
[22:41]And he withdrew from them about a stone's throw, and kneeling
down, prayed, [22:42]saying, Father, if thou wilt, take this cup away
from me; but not my will, but thine be done. [22:43]And an angel
appeared to him from heaven, strengthening him. [22:44]And being in
agony, he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat was like large drops of
blood falling down to the ground. [22:45]And rising from prayer, and
coming to the disciples, he found them sleeping from grief, [22:46]and
he said to them, Why do you sleep? Arise, and pray that you may not
enter into trial.

2 [22:47]And while he was yet speaking, behold a multitude, and he that
was called Judas, one of the twelve, came before them, and he
approached Jesus to kiss him. [22:48]But Jesus said to him, Judas, do
you betray the Son of man with a kiss? [22:49]And those about him
seeing what was about to occur, said, Lord, shall we strike with the
sword? [22:50]And one of them struck the servant of the chief priest,
and took off his right ear.  [22:51]But Jesus answered and said, Suffer
even this; and touching his ear he healed him. [22:52]And Jesus said to
the chief priests, and commanders of the temple, and elders who came
against him, Have you come with swords and clubs, as against a robber?
[22:53] When I was daily with you in the temple you stretched not out
your hands upon me but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.

3 [22:54]And apprehending him, they led him away, and conducted him to
the house of the chief priest; and Peter followed at a distance.
[22:55]And they having kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and
sat down, Peter sat in the midst of them.  [22:56]And a certain female
servant seeing him sitting by the light, and looking steadily at him,
said, This man also was with him. [22:57] But he denied him, saying, I
do not know him, woman.  [22:58]And after a little, another seeing him,
said, You also are one of them. But Peter said, Man, I am not.
[22:59]And about an hour intervening, another strongly affirmed,
saying, Certainly, this man was also with him; for he is also a
Galilean. [22:60]But Peter said, Man, I know not what you say. And
immediately, while he was yet speaking, a cock crew. [22:61]And the
Lord turned and looked at Peter; and Peter was reminded of the Lord's
word, that he said to him, Before a cock crows to-day you shall deny me
thrice; [22:62]and going out, Peter wept bitterly.

4 [22:63]And the men having him in custody mocked him, beating him;
[22:64]and blindfolding him they asked him, saying, Prophecy who it is
that struck you? [22:65]And they reviled him with many other words.

5 [22:66]And when it was day, the eldership of the people, and the
chief priests, and scribes were assembled, and they brought him into
their sanhedrim, saying, [22:67]If you are the Christ, tell us? And he
said to them, If I tell you you will not believe; [22:68]and if I ask
you will not answer. [22:69]But from this time the Son of man will sit
on the right hand of the power of God. [22:70]And they all said, Are
you the Son of God then? And he said to them, I am as you say.
[22:71]And they said, What further need have we of testimony? for we
ourselves have heard from his mouth.




CHAPTER XXX. CHRIST BEFORE PILATE AND HEROD, HIS CONDEMNATION.


1 [23:1]AND all the multitude arose and led him to Pilate.  [23:2]And
they accused him, saying, We have found this man perverting our nation,
and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, saying that he is an anointed
king. [23:3] And Pilate asked him, saying, Are you the king of the
Jews? And he answered and said to him, As you say. [23:4]And Pilate
said to the chief priests, and the multitudes, I find no fault with
this man. [23:5]And they were more violent, saying, He excites the
people, teaching in all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this
place. [23:6]And Pilate hearing of Galilee asked if the man was a
Galilean.  [23:7]And learning that he was of the province of Herod, he
sent him to Herod, who was himself also at Jerusalem in those days.

2 [23:8]And when Herod saw Jesus he was much pleased; for he had wished
for a long time to see him, because he had beard about him, and he
hoped to see some miracle performed by him. [23:9]And he questioned him
with many words; but he answered him nothing.  [23:10]And the chief
priests and scribes stood up, violently accusing him. [23:11]And Herod,
with his soldiers, treated him with contempt, and mocked him, and put
on him a splendid garment, and sent him back to Pilate. [23:12]And
Pilate and Herod became friends to each other on that day; for they had
before been enemies to each other.

3 [23:13]And Pilate having called the chief priests, and rulers, and
the people, [23:14]said to them, You have brought me this man as one
that perverts the people; and behold, having had an examination before
you, I have found in this man no cause for the charges which you bring
against him, [23:15]but neither has Herod, for I sent you to him, and
behold, nothing worthy of death has been done by him; [23:16]having
chastised him therefore, I will release him. [23:18]And the whole
multitude cried out, saying, Take away this man, and release to us
Barabbas; [23:19]who had been cast into prison for a certain sedition
made in the city, and a murder.

4 [23:20]Pilate therefore addressed them again, wishing to release
Jesus; [23:21]but they replied, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.
[23:22]And he said to them a third time, [Why], for what evil has this
man done? I have found no cause of death in him; having chastised him
therefore, I will release him.  [23:23]And they beset him with loud
cries, demanding that he should be crucified; and their cries, and
those of the chief priests, prevailed; [23:24] and Pilate answered,
that their demand should be granted. [23:25]And he released him that
was cast into prison for sedition and murder, whom they desired, and
delivered up Jesus to their will.




CHAPTER XXXI. CHRIST'S CRUCIFIXION, DEATH, AND BURIAL.


1 [23:26]AND when they led him away, they took Simon, a certain
Cyrenian, coming from the country, and put on him the cross to bear
after Jesus. [23:27] And there followed him a great multitude of the
people, and of women; and they bewailed and lamented him. [23:28]And
turning to them, Jesus said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for yourselves, and for your children. [23:29]For behold, days
come in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and those who
have not borne children, and the breasts which have not nursed them!
[23:30]Then shall they say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the
hills, Cover us; [23:31]for if they do these things with the green
tree, what shall be done with the dry? [23:32]And two other criminals
were led out to be put to death with him.

2 [23:33]And when they arrived at the place called Cranium, there they
crucified him, and the criminals; one on his right hand, and the other
on his left. [23:34]And Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do. And distributing his garments they cast lots [for
them]. [23:35]And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also
scoffed, saying, He saved others; if this is the Christ, the elect of
God, let him save himself.  [23:36]And the soldiers also mocked him,
and came and presented him vinegar, [23:37]and said, If you are the
king of the Jews, save yourself. [23:38]And there was an inscription
over him; THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

3 [23:39]And one of the criminals crucified, reviled him, [saying], Are
you not the Christ? save yourself and us.  [23:40]But the other
answered and rebuked him, and said, Do you not fear God, since you are
under the same sentence? [23:41]and we indeed justly, for we receive
the desert of our doings; but this man has done nothing amiss.
[23:42]And he said, Jesus, remember me when you come in your kingdom.
[23:43]And he said to him, I tell you truly, to-day you shall be with
me in paradise.

4 [23:44]And it was now about the sixth hour [noon]; and there was a
darkness over all the land till the ninth hour [3 P.M.].  [23:45]And
the sun was obscured; and the vail in the midst of the temple was rent
in two. [23:46]And Jesus crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into
thy hands I commit my spirit; and having said this, he expired.
[23:47]And the centurion seeing what was done, glorified God, saying,
Truly this was a righteous man. [23:48]And all the multitudes who had
come together to this spectacle, beholding what was done, returned
beating their breasts. [23:49]And all his friends stood at a distance,
and the women who had followed him from Galilee, seeing these things.

5 [23:50]And behold, a man by the name of Joseph, a counsellor, a good
and righteous man, [23:51]this man had not consented to their design
and doing, [he was] from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, and he expected
the kingdom of God. [23:52]This man coming to Pilate asked for the body
of Jesus; [23:53]and taking it down, he wrapped it in linen, and laid
it in a tomb cut out of a rock, in which no man had yet been laid.
[23:54]And the day was the preparation; the sabbath was dawning.




CHAPTER XXXII. CHRIST AFTER HIS RESURRECTION.


1 [23:55]AND women following him who had come up with him from Galilee
saw the tomb, and how his body was laid. [23:56]And they returned and
prepared spices and ointments, and rested on the sabbath, according to
the commandment.

2 [24:1]And on the first day of the week, early in the morning, they
came to the tomb bringing the spices which they had prepared. [24:2]And
they found the stone rolled away from the tomb; [24:3]and entering,
found not the body. [24:4] And while they were in doubt about this,
behold, two men stood by them in shining clothing. [24:5]And [the
women] being afraid, and bowing their faces to the earth, they said to
them, Why do you seek the living with the dead? [24:6] He is not here,
but is raised.  Remember how he told you while he was yet in Galilee,
[24:7]saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of wicked
men to be crucified, and on the third day rise again.  [24:8]And they
remembered his words; [24:9]and returning from the tomb related all
these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.  [24:10]And they were
the Magdalene Mary, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the
others with them, who told these things to the apostles. [24:11]And
their words appeared to them like idle talk; and they believed them not.

3 [24:13]And behold, two of them went the same day to a village about
sixty stadiums [7 miles] from Jerusalem, called Emmaus; [24:14]and they
conversed together of all these things which had happened. [24:15]And
as they conversed and reasoned together, Jesus also himself approaching
walked with them; [24:16] but their eyes were restrained that they did
not know him. [24:17]And he said to them, What reports are these which
you relate one to the other as you walk and are sad? [24:18]And one of
them answered, whose name was Cleopas, and said to him, Do you live
alone at Jerusalem and not know the things which have occurred in it in
these days? [24:19]And he said to them, What things? And they said to
him, The things relating to Jesus the Nazoraean, who was a prophet,
mighty in work and word before God and all the people; [24:20]and how
our chief priests and rulers delivered him up to the sentence of death,
and crucified him, [24:21]But we hoped that he was the one who was to
redeem Israel. But indeed, also, in addition to all these things, today
is the third day since these things occurred; [24:22]but some of our
women also astonished us, who being early at the tomb [24:23]and not
finding his body, came, saying that they had seen a vision of angels,
who said that he was alive. [24:24]And some of those with us went to
the tomb, and found even as the women had said; and him they saw not.

4 [24:25]And he said to them, O foolish men, and of a mind slow to
believe all that the prophets have spoken. [24:26]Ought not the Christ
to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?  [24:27]And from
Moses, and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself.  [24:28]And they approached
the village to which they were going; and he pretended to be going
farther. [24:29]And they urged him, saying, Remain with us, for it is
near evening, and the day is already past. And he went in to remain
with them; [24:30]and when he reclined with them, taking bread, he
blessed, and breaking, gave them. [24:31]And their eyes were opened,
and they knew him; and he vanished from their sight. [24:32]And they
said one to the other, Did not our hearts burn within us when he spoke
to us on the way? when he opened to us the Scriptures? [24:33]And
rising up the same hour they returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven, and those with them, assembled together, [24:34]saying, The
Lord has risen indeed and has appeared to Simon. [24:35]And they
related the things on the way, and how he was known to them by the
breaking of bread.

5 [24:36]And as they were saying these things he stood in the midst of
them; [24:37]and they being terrified and afraid, thought they saw a
spirit. [24:38] And he said to them, Why are you troubled? and why do
doubts arise in your minds? [24:39]See my hands and my feet, that I am
he; feel of me, and see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you
see me have. [24:41]And while they yet disbelieved from joy, and
wondered, he said to them, Have you any food here? [24:42]And they gave
him part of a broiled fish, and of a honeycomb; [24:43] and taking it,
he eat before them.

6 [24:44]And he said to them, These are my words which I spoke to you
while I was yet with you, that all things written in the law of Moses,
and Prophets, and Psalms, concerning me, must be fully accomplished.
[24:45]Then he opened their understanding to understand the Scriptures,
[24:46]and said to them, Thus it is written, that the Christ should
suffer, and rise from the dead on the third day, [24:47]and that a
change of mind and forgiveness of sins should be preached in his name
to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem. [24:48]You are witnesses of
these things.  [24:49]Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you;
but remain in the city till you are endued with power from on high.

7 [24:50]And he led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his
hands, blessed them; [24:51]and while he was blessing them he departed
from them. [24:52]And they returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
[24:53]and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God.





