THE GOSPEL OF MATTHEW. CHAPTER I. THE GENEALOGY AND BIRTH OF CHRIST.


1 [1:1]AN account of the birth of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham. [1:2]Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and
Jacob begat Judah and his brothers; [1:3]and Judah begat Pharez and
Zarah by Thamar; and Pharez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram,
[1:4]and Ram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Nashon, and Nashon
begat Salmon, [1:5]and Salmon begat Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed
by Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse, [1:6]and Jesse begat David the king.

2 And David begat Solomon by the wife of Uriah, [1:7]and Solomon begat
Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa, [1:8]and Asa
begat Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat begat Jehoram, and Jehoram begat
Uzziah, [1:9]and Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz
begat Hezekiah, [1:10]and Hezekiah begat Manassah, and Manassah begat
Amon, and Amon begat Josiah, [1:11] and Josiah begat Jechoniah and his
brothers at the Babylonian exile.

3 [1:12]After the Babylonian exile, Jechoniah begat Shealtiel, and
Shealtiel begat Zerubabel, [1:13]and Zerubabel begat Abiud, and Abiud
begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azar, [1:14]and Azar begat Zadoc, and
Zadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud, [1:15]and Eliud begat
Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob, [1:16]and
Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, called
Christ. [1:17]All the generations therefore, from Abraham to David, are
fourteen generations; and from David to the Babylonian exile, fourteen
generations; and from the Babylonian exile to the Christ, fourteen
generations.

4 [1:18]The birth of Christ was thus. His mother Mary having been
espoused to Joseph, before they came together, was found to be with
child by the Holy Spirit. [1:19]But Joseph her husband being a
righteous man, and not wishing to make her an example, was designing to
put her away privately. [1:20]But while he was thinking of these
things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream,
saying, Joseph, son of David, fear not to take Mary your wife, for that
which is conceived in her is by the Holy Spirit, [1:21]and she shall
bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins.

5 [1:22]But all this was done, that the word of the Lord might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying; [1:23]Behold, the
virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son, and they shall call
his name Emmanuel; which is interpreted, God is with us. [1:24]And when
Joseph awoke from his sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord had
commanded him, and took his wife, [1:25]and knew her not till she bore
a son, and he called his name Jesus.




CHAPTER II. THE INFANCY OF CHRIST.


1 [2:1]AND Jesus being born in Bethlehem in Judea, in the days of Herod
the king, behold Magi came from the East to Jerusalem, saying,
[2:2]Where is the king of the Jews born? For we have seen his star in
the East, and have come to worship him. [2:3]And Herod the king hearing
this was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him; [2:4]and assembling all
the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where
the Christ is born. [2:5]And they said to him, In Bethlehem of Judea;
for thus it is written by the prophet; [2:6]And you Bethlehem, land of
Judah, are by no means least among the governors of Judah, for out of
you shall come a governor who shall rule my people Israel.

2 [2:7]Then Herod, calling the Magi secretly, asked them the precise
time when the star appeared; [2:8]and sending them to Bethlehem, said,
Go and inquire diligently for the young child, and when you have found
him, tell me, that I also may come and worship him. [2:9]And hearing
the king, they departed; and behold, the star which they saw in the
East went before them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was. [2:10]And seeing the star they rejoiced with great joy;
[2:11]and coming into the house they saw the young child with Mary his
mother; and they fell down and worshipped him; and opening their
treasures they presented him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
[2:12] And being divinely instructed in a dream not to return to Herod,
they departed to their country another way.

3 [2:13]And when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child
and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and remain there till I tell you;
for Herod will seek the young child to destroy it.  [2:14]And he arose
and took the young child and his mother by night, and fled into Egypt,
[2:15]and was there till the death of Herod; that the word might be
fulfilled, which the Lord spoke by the prophet, saying; Out of Egypt
have I called my son.

4 [2:16]Then Herod seeing that he was despised by the Magi, was
exceedingly angry, and sent and destroyed all the children in
Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from two years old and under,
according to the precise time which he had learned of the Magi.
[2:17]Thus was fulfilled the word spoken by Jeremiah the prophet,
saying; [2:18]A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and great
mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted
because they were not.

5 [2:19]And when Herod had died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared
to Joseph in a dream, in Egypt, saying, [2:20]Arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead
that sought the young child's life.  [2:21]And he arose and took the
young child and his mother, and went into the land of Israel. [2:22]But
hearing that Archelaus reigned over Judea in the place of Herod his
father, he was afraid to go there; but being divinely instructed in a
dream, he departed into the parts of Galilee, [2:23] and went and lived
in a city called Nazareth, that the word spoken by the prophets might
be fulfilled, He shall be called a Nazoraean.




CHAPTER III. CHRIST'S BAPTISM AND TEMPTATION.


1 [3:1]AND in those days came John the Baptist preaching in the
wilderness of Judea, saying, [3:2]Change your minds, for the kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. [3:3]For this is he that was spoken of by Isaiah the
prophet, saying; A voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare the
way of the Lord, make his paths straight.  [3:4]And this John had his
clothes of camel's hair, and a leather girdle about his loins, and his
food was locusts and wild honey.  [3:5]Then went out to him Jerusalem,
and all Judea, and all the region about the Jordan, [3:6] and were
baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

2 [3:7]And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come for the
baptism, he said to them; Offspring of vipers, who has warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? [3:8]Bear fruit, therefore, worthy of a
change of mind; [3:9]and think not to say within yourselves, We have
Abraham for a father; for I tell you that God is able of these stones
to raise up children to Abraham; [3:10]and already the axe lies at the
root of the trees; every tree, therefore, which bears not good fruit is
cut down and cast into the fire. [3:11]I indeed baptize you with water
to a change of mind; but he that comes after me is mightier than I,
whose shoes I am not fit to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy
Spirit, and fire; [3:12]whose winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly clean his threshing floor, and gather his wheat into
the storehouse; but the chaff he will burn with an inextinguishable
fire.

3 [3:13]Then came Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be
baptized by him. [3:14]But, he refused him, saying, I have need to be
baptized by you, and do you come to me? [3:15]But Jesus answered and
said to him, Suffer me now; for thus, it becomes us to complete all
righteousness. Then he suffered him; [3:16] and Jesus being baptized
went up immediately from the water, and behold, the heavens were
opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descend like a dove and come upon
him. [3:17]And behold, a voice from the heavens, saying, This is my
beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

4 [4:1]Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted by the devil. [4:2]And having fasted forty days and forty
nights, he was afterwards hungry. [4:3]And the tempter came and said to
him, If you are the Son of God, command these stones to become bread.
[4:4]And he answered and said; It is written, man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word which proceeds from the mouth of God.
[4:5]Then the devil took him into the holy city, and placed him on the
pinnacle of the temple, [4:6]and said to him, If you are the Son of
God, cast yourself down; for it is written, He shall give his angels
charge concerning you, and they shall take you up on their hands, lest
at any time you dash your foot against a stone. [4:7]Jesus said to him,
Again it is written, You shall not try the Lord your God.  [4:8]Again
the devil took him away on a very high mountain, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world, and their glory, [4:9]and said to him, All these
things will I give you, if you will fall down and worship me.
[4:10]Then Jesus said to him, Get behind me Satan; for it is written,
You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.
[4:11]Then the devil left him; and behold angels came and waited on him.




CHAPTER IV. CHRIST COMMENCING HIS PUBLIC MINISTRY.


1 [4:12]AND when he heard that John was delivered up, he departed to
Galilee; [4:13]and leaving Nazareth he came and lived at Capernaum on
the lake, in the bounds of Zebulon and Naphtali, [4:14]that the word
might be fulfilled, spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying; [4:15]Land of
Zebulon and Naphtali, by the way of the lake, beyond the Jordan,
Galilee of the nations, [4:16]the people who sat in darkness have seen
a great light, and upon those who sat in the region and shade of death
has light arisen.  [4:17]From that time Jesus began to preach, and to
say, Change your minds; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

2 [4:18]And walking by the lake of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon,
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the lake, for
they were fishermen. [4:19]And he said to them, Come after me, and I
will make you fishermen of men. [4:20]And they left their nets,
immediately, and followed him. [4:21]And going forward thence, he saw
two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in
the ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called
them. [4:22]And they immediately left the ship and their father, and
followed him.

3 [4:23]And he went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and
every infirmity among the people. [4:24]And his fame went out into all
Syria; and they brought him all that were ill, afflicted with various
diseases and torments, and demoniacs, and lunatics, and paralytics, and
he cured them; [4:25] and great multitudes followed him from Galilee,
and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond the Jordan.




CHAPTER V. CHRIST'S SERMON ON THE MOUNT.


1 [5:1]AND seeing the multitudes, he went on the mountain and sat down;
and his disciples came to him. [5:2]And he opened his mouth and taught
them, saying; [5:3]Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. [5:5] Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth. [5:4]Blessed are those that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. [5:6]Blessed are those that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, for they shall be filled.  [5:7]Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.  [5:8]Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God.  [5:9]Blessed are the peace makers, for
they shall be called children of God. [5:10]Blessed are the persecuted
for righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. [5:11]Blessed
are you when they shall reproach you, and persecute you, and say every
evil against you, falsely, for my sake. [5:12] Rejoice and exult, for
great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who
were before you.

2 [5:13]You are the salt of the earth; but if the salt has lost its
strength, with what shall it be seasoned? It is good for nothing more,
except being cast out to be trodden upon by men.  [5:14]You are the
light of the world. A city situated on a mountain cannot be hid.
[5:15]Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a modius [1.916
gallon measure], but on a candlestick, and it shines to all in the
house. [5:16]Let your light so shine before men that they may see your
good works, and glorify your father in heaven. [5:17]Think not that I
have come to destroy the law or the prophets; I have not come to
destroy but to complete. [5:18]For I tell you truly, that till heaven
and earth pass away, one iota or one point shall by no means pass away
from the law till all things are accomplished. [5:19]Whoever therefore
shall break one of the least of these commandments, and teach men so,
shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever shall do
and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. [5:20]For
I tell you, that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes
and Pharisees, you shall by no means enter into the kingdom of heaven.

3 [5:21]You have heard that it was said by the ancients, You shall not
kill; and whoever kills shall be subject to the judgment. [5:22]But I
tell you, that every one who is angry with his brother shall be subject
to the judgment; and whoever says to his brother, Worthless fellow,
shall be subject to the Sanhedrim; and whoever says, You fool, shall be
subject to the hell of fire.  [5:23]If, therefore, you offer your gift
on the altar, and there remember that your brother has any thing
against you, [5:24]leave there your gift before the altar, and go and
first be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.
[5:25]Agree with your accuser quickly, while you are with him in the
way, lest the accuser deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver
you to the officer, and you be cast into prison. [5:26]I tell you
truly, you shall not go out thence till you have paid the last quadrans
[4 mills].

4 [5:27]You have heard that it was said, You shall not commit adultery;
[5:28] but I tell you, that every one who looks on a woman to desire
her inordinately, has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
[5:29]But if your right eye offends you, pluck it out and cast it from
you; for it is better for you that one of your members should perish,
and not that your whole body should be cast into hell. [5:30]And if
your right hand offends you, cut it off and cast it from you; for it is
better for you that one of your members should perish, and not that
your whole body should go into hell. [5:31]And it was said, Whoever
would put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorcement. [5:32]
But I tell you, that whoever puts away his wife, except for adultery,
causes her to commit adultery; and whoever marries her that is put
away, commits adultery. [5:33]Again, you have heard that it was said by
the ancients, You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform to the
Lord your oaths. [5:34]But I tell you, Swear not at all; neither by
heaven, for it is God's throne; [5:35]nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King;
[5:36]nor swear by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or
black.  [5:37]But let your speech be, yes, yes, and no, no; for any
thing more than this is evil.

5 [5:38]You have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth. [5:39]But I tell you not to resist the evil man; but
whoever shall strike you on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also; [5:40]and if a man wishes to have a law suit with you, and take
away your coat, let him have your cloak also; [5:41]and whoever shall
compel you to go one mile, go two miles with him. [5:42]Give to him
that asks, and from him that would borrow of you turn not away.
[5:43]You have heard that it was said, You shall love your neighbor,
and hate your enemy.  [5:44]But I tell you, Love your enemies, and pray
for those that persecute you; [5:45]that you may be children of your
Father in heaven; for he causes his sun to rise on the evil and the
good, and rains on the just and unjust. [5:46]For if you love those
that love you, what reward have you? Do not the publicans the same?
[5:47]And if you salute your brothers only, what do you do more than
[others]? Do not the gentiles also do the same?  [5:48]Be therefore
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

6 [6:1]But take heed not to perform your righteousness before men, to
be seen by them; otherwise indeed, you have no reward from your Father
in heaven. [6:2] When, therefore, you give in charity, sound not a
trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues and in the
streets, that they may be glorified by men. I tell you truly, they have
their reward. [6:3]But when you give in charity let not your left hand
know what your right hand does, [6:4]that your charity may be in
secret; and your Father who sees in secret shall reward you.

7 [6:5]And when you pray, be not like the hypocrites; for they love to
pray standing in the synagogues, and at the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen by men. I tell you truly, they have their reward.
[6:6]But when you pray enter into your private room, and having shut
your door pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who
sees in secret shall reward you.  [6:7]And when you pray use not vain
repetitions, as the gentiles do; for they think they shall be heard for
their much speaking.  [6:8]Be not, therefore, like them; for your
Father knows what you need before you ask him. [6:9]Pray, therefore,
thus; Our Father in heaven, hallowed be thy name; [6:10]thy kingdom
come; thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth; [6:11]give us to-day
our essential bread, [6:12]and forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors; [6:13]and bring us not into trial, but deliver us from evil.
[6:14]For if you forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will
forgive you; [6:15]but if you forgive not men, neither will your Father
forgive your offenses.

8 [6:16]And when you fast, be not like the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance; for they disfigure their faces that they may appear to men
to fast. I tell you truly, they have their reward.  [6:17]But when you
fast, anoint your head, and wash your face, [6:18]that you may not
appear to men to fast, but to your Father in secret; and your Father
who sees in secret shall reward you.

9 [6:19]Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where a moth
and corrosion destroy, and where thieves dig through and steal.
[6:20]But lay up treasures for yourselves in heaven, where neither a
moth nor corrosion destroys, and where thieves dig not through nor
steal; [6:21]for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

10 [6:22]The light of the body is the eye. If, therefore, your eye is
sound, your whole body will be light; [6:23]but if your eye is evil,
your whole body will be dark. If, therefore, the light which is in you
is darkness, how great is the darkness!  [6:24]No one can serve two
masters; for either he will hate the first, and love the other, or he
will adhere to the first, and despise the other. You cannot serve God
and riches. [6:25]On this account I tell you, be not anxious for your
soul, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; nor for your body,
what you shall put on, is not the soul more than food, and the body
more than clothing? [6:26]Look at the birds of heaven; they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into store-houses; but your heavenly
Father feeds them. Are you not much better than they?  [6:27]Which of
you by being anxious can add one cubit to his stature? [6:28]And why
are you anxious concerning clothing?  Consider the lilies of the field,
how they grow; they perform no hard labor, neither do they spin;
[6:29]but I tell you that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like
one of these.  [6:30]And if God so clothes the grass of the field,
which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, will he not much
more clothe you, men of little faith? [6:31]Be not anxious, therefore,
saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or with what shall
we be clothed? [6:32]For after all these things the gentiles seek; and
your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. [6:33]But
seek first righteousness and his kingdom, and all these things shall be
added to you. [6:34]Be not anxious, therefore, for to-morrow, for
to-morrow will be anxious for its; sufficient for the day is its evil.

11 [7:1]Judge not, that you be not judged; [7:2]for with what judgment
you judge you shall be judged; and with what measure you measure it
shall be measured to you. [7:3]And why do you see a speck in your
brother's eye, and not consider a beam in your own eye? [7:4]or how
will you say to your brother, Let me cast out the speck from your eye,
and behold a beam in your own eye? [7:5] Hypocrite, cast out first the
beam from your eye, and then will you see clearly to cast out the speck
from your brother's eye.  [7:6]Give not a holy thing to dogs, neither
cast your pearls before swine, lest they tread them down with their
feet, and turn and rend you. [7:7]Ask, and it shall be given you. Seek,
and you shall find. Knock, and it shall be opened to you. [7:8]For
every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. [7:9]Or is there any man of you, who,
if his son asks bread of him, will give him a stone?  [7:10]or if he
asks a fish, will give him a serpent? [7:11]If you then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your
Father in heaven give good gifts to them that ask him. [7:12]All
things, therefore, which you wish men to do to you, do also thus to
them; for this is the law and the prophets.

12 [7:13]Enter in through the narrow gate, for wide is the gate; and
spacious the way which leads to destruction, and many are they that
enter in by it; [7:14]for narrow is the gate, and compressed the way
which leads to life, and few are those who find it. [7:15]But beware of
false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but within they
are rapacious wolves. [7:16]You shall know them by their fruits. Do men
gather grapes from thorns? or figs from thistles? [7:17]So every good
tree bears good fruits, but a bad tree bears bad fruits; [7:18]a good
tree cannot bear bad fruits, nor a bad tree good fruits. [7:19] Every
tree which bears not good fruit is cut down and cast into the fire.
[7:20] By their fruits, therefore, you shall know them.

13 [7:21]Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father in
heaven. [7:22]Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in your name, and in your name cast out demons, and in your
name performed many mighty works?  [7:23]and then will I confess to
them, I never knew you; depart from me you that commit wickedness.

14 [7:24]Every one, therefore, that hears these words of mine and
performs them, I will liken to a wise man who built his house on the
rock; [7:25]and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew and beat on that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on the
rock. [7:26]And every one who hears these words of mine and performs
them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, who built his house on the
sand; [7:27]and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew and beat on that house, and it fell; and its fall was great.
[7:28]And when Jesus had finished these words the multitudes were
astonished at his teaching; [7:29]for he taught them as having
authority, and not as their scribes.




CHAPTER VI. CHRIST'S MIRACLES, PREVIOUS TO THE APPOINTMENT OF HIS TWELVE APOSTLES.


1 [8:1]AND when he went down from the mountain great multitudes
followed him; [8:2]and behold, a leper came and worshipped him, saying,
Lord, if you will, you can cleanse me. [8:3]And stretching out his
hand, he touched him, saying, I will; be cleansed; and his leprosy was
immediately cleansed. [8:4]And Jesus said to him, See that you tell no
man, but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift which
Moses commanded for a testimony to them.

2 [8:5]And when he entered into Capernaum a centurion came to him,
beseeching him, [8:6]and saying; Lord, my servant lies sick in my house
with paralysis, exceedingly distressed. [8:7]He said to him, I will
come and cure him. [8:8] And the centurion answered and said, Lord, I
am not fit that you should come under my roof; but only say the word
and my servant will be cured.  [8:9]For I also am a man under
authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this man, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this,
and he does it.  [8:10]Jesus hearing wondered and said to those that
followed him, I tell you truly, I have not found so great a faith with
any one in Israel; [8:11]and I tell you that many shall come from the
East and from the West, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, [8:12]but the children of the kingdom
shall be cast into the darkness outside; there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. [8:13]And Jesus said to the centurion, Go; as you
have believed be it to you; and the servant was cured at that hour.

3 [8:14]And Jesus coming into the house of Peter, saw his wife's mother
lying and sick with a fever. [8:15]And he touched her hand, and the
fever left her; and she arose and waited on them.  [8:16]And when it
was evening they brought him many demoniacs, and he cast out the
spirits with a word, and cured all that were sick, [8:17]that the word
might be fulfilled spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying; He took our
infirmities and bore our diseases.

4 [8:18]And Jesus seeing great multitudes around him commanded them to
go away to the other side. [8:19]And a certain scribe came and said to
him, Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.  [8:20]And Jesus said
to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have places of
shelter, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.
[8:21]Another of the disciples said to him, Lord, permit me first to go
away and bury my father.  [8:22]But Jesus said to him, Follow me, and
let the dead bury their dead. [8:23]And he entered into a ship, and his
disciples followed him. [8:24]And behold there was a great tempest on
the lake, so that the ship was covered with the waves; but he was
asleep. [8:25] And they came and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us; we
perish. [8:26]And he said to them, Why are you afraid, men of little
faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the lake, and there was
a great calm. [8:27]And the men wondered, saying, What kind of a man is
this, that the winds and the lake obey him?

5 [8:28]And when he had come to the other side, into the country of the
Gadarenes, two demoniacs met him, coming out of the tombs, exceedingly
fierce, so that no man could pass that way. [8:29]And behold they
cried, saying, What have you to do with us, Son of God? Have you come
hither before the time to torment us?  [8:30]And there was far off from
them a herd of many swine feeding. [8:31]And, the demons besought him,
saying, If you cast us out, send us into the herd of swine. [8:32]And
he said to them, Go. And going out, they went away into the herd of
swine, and, behold, the whole herd rushed down a precipice into the
lake, and died in the waters; [8:33]and those who fed them fled, and
going away into the city reported all things, and the events relating
to the demoniacs. [8:34]And behold all the city came out to meet Jesus;
and when they saw him they besought him to depart from their bounds.

6 [9:1]And entering a ship, he crossed over, and came to his own city;
[9:2] and behold they brought him a paralytic, lying on a bed. And
Jesus seeing their faith said to the paralytic, Son, be of good
courage; your sins are forgiven. [9:3]And behold some of the scribes
said within themselves, This man blasphemes. [9:4]And Jesus observing
their thoughts, said, Why do you think evil in your hearts? [9:5]For in
what respect is it easier to say, Your sins are forgiven, than to say,
Arise and walk? [9:6]But that you may know that the Son of man has
power on the earth to forgive sins, then he said to the paralytic,
Arise, take up your bed, and go to your house. [9:7]And he arose and
departed to his house.  [9:8]And when the multitudes saw it they were
afraid, and glorified God who had given such power to men.

7 [9:9]And Jesus departing thence saw a man sitting at the
custom-house, called Matthew; and he said to him, Follow me. And he
arose and followed him. [9:10] And he was reclining in the house, and
behold, many publicans and sinners came and reclined with Jesus and his
disciples. [9:11]And when the Pharisees saw them they said to his
disciples, Why does your teacher eat with publicans and sinners?
[9:12]And hearing it he said, The well need not a physician, but the
sick. [9:13]Go and learn what this means: I wish for mercy and not a
sacrifice; for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.

8 [9:14]Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and
the Pharisees fast much, but your disciples fast not?  [9:15]And Jesus
said to them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn as long as the
bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom
will be taken from them, and then they shalt fast. [9:16]But no one
puts a piece of unfilled cloth on an old garment; for it takes away its
fullness from the garment, and the rent is made worse. [9:17]Neither do
they put new wine into old bottles; otherwise the bottles break, and
the wine is poured out and the bottles destroyed; but they put new wine
into new bottles, and both are preserved.

9 [9:18]While he was saying these words to them, behold a ruler came
and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is now dead, but come and put
your hand on her and she shall live. [9:19]And Jesus arose and followed
him, and his disciples. [9:20]And behold a woman having a hemorrhage of
twelve years approached him from behind, and touched the fringe of his
garment; [9:21]for she said within herself, If I can only touch his
garment I shall be cured.  [9:22]And Jesus turning around and seeing
her, said, Daughter, be of good courage, your faith has cured you. And
the woman was cured from that hour.

10 [9:23]And Jesus coming into the house of the ruler, and seeing the
musicians and the multitude making a tumultuous noise, [9:24]said, Go
away; for the girl is not dead, but asleep. And they derided him.
[9:25]But when the multitude were removed he went in and took her hand,
and the girl arose. [9:26]And the report went out into all that land.

11 [9:27]And as Jesus was departing thence two blind men followed him,
crying and saying, Have mercy on us, Son of David! [9:28]And when he
had gone into the house the blind men came to him, and Jesus said to
them, Do you believe that I am able to do this?  They said to him, Yes,
Lord. [9:29]Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith
be it to you; [9:30]and their eyes were opened. And Jesus charged them
strictly, saying, See that no one knows it. [9:31]But they went out and
made him known in all that land.

12 [9:32]And when they had gone away, behold, the people brought to him
a man, a dumb demoniac. [9:33]And the demon being cast out, the dumb
spoke; and the multitudes wondered, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel. [9:34]But the Pharisees said, He casts out demons by the ruler
of the demons.

13 [9:35]And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and
curing every disease, and every infirmity. [9:36]And seeing the
multitudes he had compassion on them because they were faint and
scattered, like sheep without a shepherd. [9:37]Then he said to his
disciples, The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers few.
[9:38]Pray, therefore, the Lord of the harvest to thrust laborers into
his harvest.




CHAPTER VII. THE APPOINTMENT OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES.


1 [10:1]AND calling his twelve disciples, he gave them power over
impure spirits to cast them out, and to cure every disease and every
infirmity. [10:2] And the names of the twelve apostles are these;
First, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James, the
son of Zebedee, and John his brother; [10:3]Philip and Bartholomew;
Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James, the son of Alpheus, and
Lebbeus, called Thaddeus; [10:4]Simon, the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him. [10:5]These twelve Jesus sent out and charged
them, saying; Go not into a way of gentiles, and enter not into a city
of Samaritans, [10:6]but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; [10:7]and as you go, preach, saying, The kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. [10:8] Cure the sick, cleanse lepers, cast out demons; you
have received gratuitously, gratuitously give. [10:9]Take not gold, nor
silver, nor copper for your purses, [10:10]nor a provision sack for the
way, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor staves; for the laborer is worthy of
his support; [10:11]and into whatever city or village you enter,
inquire who in it is worthy, and there remain till you leave.
[10:12]And when you go into a house, salute it; [10:13]and if the house
is worthy, your blessing shall come upon it; but if the house is not
worthy, your blessing shall return to you.  [10:14]And if any one does
not receive you, nor hear your words, when you go out of that house or
that city, shake off the dust of your feet. [10:15]I tell you truly, it
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in a day of
judgment, than for that city.

2 [10:16]Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be
therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.  [10:17]But beware of
men; for they will deliver you to Sanhedrims, and scourge you in their
synagogues, [10:18]and you shall be brought before governors, and
kings, for my sake, for a testimony to them and the nations. [10:19]But
when they have delivered you up be not anxious how you shall speak, or
what you shall say, for it shall be given you in that hour what to say;
[10:20]for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaks in you. [10:21]And a brother shall deliver a brother to death,
and a father a son; and children shall rise up against their parents
and put them to death; [10:22]and you shall be hated by all men for my
sake. But he that endures to the end shall be saved. [10:23]And when
they persecute you in one city, flee to another. For I tell you truly,
that you will not finish the cities of Israel till the Son of man shall
come.

3 [10:24]A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his
master. [10:25]It is sufficient for the disciple to be as his teacher,
and the servant as his master. If they have called the master of the
house Beelzebul, how much more will they call the members of his family
by that name. [10:26]Fear them not, therefore, for there is nothing
concealed that shall not be revealed, nor hid that shall not be known.
[10:27]What I tell you in darkness, speak in the light, and what you
hear in the ear, preach on the house-tops. [10:28]And fear not those
who kill the body and are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear
him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

4 [10:29]Are not two sparrows sold for an assarion [1.5 mills]?  and
one of them cannot fall to the ground without your Father.  [10:30]Even
the hairs of your head are all numbered. [10:31]Fear not, therefore,
you are of more value than many sparrows.  [10:32]Every one, therefore,
who shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my
Father in heaven; [10:33]and whoever denies me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father in heaven.

5 [10:34]Think not that I have come to send peace on the earth. I have
not come to send peace, but a sword. [10:35]I have come to set a man at
variance against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a
bride against her mother-in-law; [10:36]and a man's enemies shall be
those of his own house. [10:37]He that loves father or mother more than
me is not worthy of me; and he that loves son or daughter more than me
is not worthy of me; [10:38]and he that does not take up his cross and
follow me is not worthy of me. [10:39]He that finds his life shall lose
it, and he that loses his life for my sake shall find it. [10:40]He
that receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives him
that sent me. [10:41]He that receives a prophet in the name of a
prophet shall receive a prophet's reward, and he that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous
man's reward. [10:42]And whoever shall give one of these little ones a
cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, I tell you truly, he
shall by no means lose his reward. [11:1]And when Jesus had finished
his charge to his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and
preach in their cities.




CHAPTER VIII. JOHN THE BAPTIST QUESTIONING CHRIST'S MESSIAHSHIP.


1 [11:2]AND John hearing in the prison of the works of Christ, sending
by his disciples, [11:3]said to him, Are you he that was coming, or
look we for another? [11:4]And Jesus answered and said to them, Go and
tell John what you see and hear; [11:5]the blind see, the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the
poor have the good news preached to them; [11:6]and blessed is he that
is not offended with me.

2 [11:7]And when they had gone, Jesus began to say to the multitudes,
concerning John, What went you out to the wilderness to see? A reed
shaken with the wind? [11:8]But what went you out to see? A man wearing
fine clothes? Behold, they that wear fine clothes are in the houses of
kings. [11:9]But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you,
and more than a prophet.  [11:10]For this is he of whom it is written;
Behold, I send my messenger before your face, to prepare your way
before you.  [11:11]I tell you truly, there has not arisen among those
born of woman a greater than John the Baptist; but the least in the
kingdom of heaven is greater than he. [11:12]And from the days of John
the Baptist till now the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. [11:13]For all the prophets and the law
prophesied till John. [11:14]And if you will receive it, this is
Elijah, who was to come.

3 [11:15]He that has ears, let him hear. [11:16]To what shall I liken
this generation? It is like little children sitting in the markets, who
call to their companions, [11:17]and say, We have played on pipes for
you, and you have not danced; we have mourned, and you have not
lamented. [11:18]For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they
say, He has a demon; [11:19]the Son of man came eating and drinking,
and they say, Behold a glutton, and a wine drinker, a friend of
publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified by her children.

4 [11:20]Then he began to rebuke those cities in which most of his
mighty works had been done, because they changed not their minds.
[11:21]Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! for if the mighty
works which have been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they
would have changed their minds long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
[11:22]But I tell you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in
a day of judgment than for you.  [11:23]And you, Capernaum, which are
exalted even to heaven, shall go down even to hades; for if the mighty
works which have been done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained to this day. [11:24]But I tell you, that it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom in a day of judgment, than for you.

5 [11:25]At that time Jesus answering said, I thank thee, Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and
intelligent, and hast revealed them to babes.  [11:26]Yes, Father, for
so it has seemed good in thy sight.  [11:27]All things are given me by
my Father; and no one knows the Son but the Father; and no one knows
the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
[11:28]Come to me all you that labor hard and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.  [11:29]Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest for your souls;
[11:30]for my yoke is easy, and my burden light.




CHAPTER IX. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH.


1 [12:1]AT that time Jesus went through the grain fields on the
sabbath; and his disciples were hungry, and began to pick the heads and
eat. [12:2]And the Pharisees seeing it, said to him, Behold, your
disciples do what it is not lawful to do on the sabbath. [12:3]But he
said to them, Have you not read what David did, when he was hungry, and
those who were with him? [12:4]how he entered into the house of God and
eat the show bread, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for
those with him, but only for the priests? [12:5]Or have you not read in
the law, that the priests profane the sabbath in the temple, and are
blameless?  [12:6]But I tell you that here is an object greater than
the temple. [12:7]But if you had known what, I wish for mercy and not a
sacrifice, means, you would not have condemned the innocent; [12:8]for
the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.

2 [12:9]And departing thence he went into their synagogue, [12:10]and
behold a man having a withered hand [was there]. And they asked him,
saying, Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath? that they might accuse
him. [12:11]And he said to them, What man is there of you having one
sheep, who if this falls into a pit on the sabbath, will not take hold
of it and lift it out? [12:12]How much then is a man better than a
sheep! So that it is lawful to do good on the sabbath. [12:13] Then he
said to the man, Stretch out your hand; and he stretched it out, and it
was restored as sound as the other; [12:14]and the Pharisees went out
and took counsel against him to destroy him.

3 [12:15]But Jesus knowing it departed thence, and great multitudes
followed him; and he cured them all, [12:16]and charged them not to
make him known; [12:17]that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Isaiah the prophet, saying; [12:18]Behold my servant, whom I have
chosen; my beloved, with whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my
spirit on him, and he shall declare judgment to the nations. [12:19]He
shall not strive nor cry aloud, nor shall any one hear his voice in the
streets.  [12:20]A bruised reed shall he not break, and a smoking flax
shall he not extinguish, till he sends forth judgment to victory.
[12:21]And in his name shall nations hope.




CHAPTER X. CHRIST'S MIRACLES ATTRIBUTED TO DEMONS. HIS RELATIONS.



1 [12:22]THEN a blind and dumb demoniac was brought to him, and he
cured him, so that the blind and dumb spoke and saw.  [12:23]And all
the multitudes wondered and said, Is this the Son of David? [12:24]But
the Pharisees hearing it, said, This man does not cast out demons,
except by Beelzebul, a ruler of the demons. [12:25]But knowing their
thoughts, he said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is
destroyed; and no city or house divided against itself can stand.
[12:26]If Satan casts out Satan he is divided against himself. How then
can his kingdom stand?  [12:27]And if I by Beelzebul cast out demons,
by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they shall be your
judges. [12:28] But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then the
kingdom of God has come upon you. [12:29]Or how can one enter into the
house of a strong man and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the
strong man, and then he will plunder his house.

2 [12:30]He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not
with me scatters. [12:31]Therefore, I tell you, every sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be
forgiven men. [12:32] And if one speaks a word against the Son of man
it shall be forgiven him; but if one speaks against the Holy Spirit it
shall not be forgiven him either in this life or in that to come.
[12:33]Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree
bad, and its fruit bad; for a tree is known by its fruit.
[12:34]Offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things?
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. [12:35]The good
man, out of his good treasury, casts forth good things; and the evil
man, out of his evil treasury, casts forth evil things.  [12:36]But I
tell you, that for every idle word which men speak they shall render an
account in a day of judgment; [12:37] for by your words you shall be
justified, and by your words you shall be condemned.

3 [12:38]Then answered some of the scribes and Pharisees, saying,
Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you. [12:39]But he answered and
said to them, An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, and
no sign shall be given it but the sign of the prophet Jonah. [12:40]For
as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the fish, so
shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. [12:41]The men of Nineveh shall rise up in the judgment with
this generation and condemn it; for they changed their minds at the
preaching of Jonah; and behold a greater than Jonah is here. [12:42]The
queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation
and condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon; and behold a greater than Solomon is here.
[12:43]But when the impure spirit has gone out of a man, it goes
through dry places seeking a rest, and finds none. [12:44]Then it says,
I will return to my house from which I went out; and coming, it finds
it empty, swept, and adorned. [12:45]Then it goes and takes with itself
seven other spirits worse than itself, and they enter in and dwell
there; and the last state of that man is worse than the first. So shall
it be also with this evil generation.

4 [12:46]And while he was speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother
and his brothers stood without, desiring to speak to him.  [12:47]And
some one said to him, Behold your mother and your brothers stand
without, desiring to speak to you. [12:48]And he answered and said to
him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brothers?
[12:49]and stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, Behold my
mother, and my brothers! [12:50]For whoever does the will of my Father
in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.




CHAPTER XI. CHRIST'S PARABLES ON THE LAKE OF GALILEE.


1 [13:1]AND on that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the
lake. [13:2] And great multitudes came together to him; and he went
into the ship and sat down; and all the multitude stood on the shore.
[13:3]And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying; Behold, a
sower went out to sow; [13:4]and as he sowed, some fell by the way, and
the birds came and devoured it.  [13:5]And some fell on rocky places,
where it had not much earth, and it came up immediately, because it had
no depth of earth; [13:6]and when the sun arose it was scorched, and
because it had no root it was dried up. [13:7]And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns came up and choked it. [13:8]But some fell on
good ground, and bore fruit; some a hundred, some sixty, and some
thirty-fold. [13:9]He that has ears let him hear.

2 [13:10]And his disciples came and said to him, Why do you speak to
them in parables? [13:11]And he answered and said to them, Because it
is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given; [13:12]for whoever has, to him shall be also
given, and he shall abound; but whoever has not, from him shall be
taken away even what he has. [13:13]For this reason I speak to them in
parables; because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear,
nor understand. [13:14]And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah,
which says; Hearing you shall hear and not understand, and seeing you
shall see and not perceive; [13:15]for the hearts of this people have
become hard, and they hear imperfectly with their ears, and their eyes
have they closed, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn, and I should
heal them. [13:16]But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your
ears, for they hear. [13:17]For I tell you truly, that many prophets
and righteous men have desired to see what you see and have not seen
it, and to hear what you hear and have not heard it.

3 [13:18]Hear, therefore, the parable of the sower. [13:19]When any one
hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one
comes and takes away the seed sown in his heart.  This is he that
received seed by the way. [13:20]He that received seed on the rocky
places is he that hears the word and immediately receives it with joy
[13:21]but has no root in himself, but is only a temporary [disciple];
and when affliction or persecution arises on account of the word, he is
immediately offended. [13:22]And he that received seed among thorns is
he that hears the word, and the cares of this life and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
[13:23]But he that received the seed in the good ground is he that
hears the word, and understands it, who also bears fruit, and produces
some one hundred, and some sixty, and some thirty-fold.

4 [13:24]And he delivered them another parable, saying; The kingdom of
heaven is like a man sowing good seed in his field; [13:25]and while
the men slept, his enemy came and sowed poisonous darnel in the midst
of the wheat, and went away.  [13:26]But when the stalk grew up and
bore fruit, then the poisonous darnel appeared. [13:27]And the servants
of the householder came and said to him, Sir, did you not sow good seed
in your field? Whence then has it poisonous darnel? [13:28]And he said
to them, An enemy has done this. And they said to him, Do you wish us
to go and take them out? [13:29]And he said, No; lest in taking out the
poisonous darnel, you pull up the wheat with it; [13:30]let both grow
together till the harvest, and at the time of the harvest, I will say
to the reapers, Collect first the poisonous darnel, and bind it in
bundles to be burnt; but collect the wheat in my storehouse.

5 [13:31]He delivered them another parable, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is like a mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his field,
[13:32]which is the least of all seeds, but when it is grown is the
greatest of plants, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven
come and lodge on its branches. [13:33]He spoke another parable to
them; The kingdom of heaven is like leaven which a woman took and hid
in three sata [33 quarts] of flour, till the whole was leavened.
[13:34]All these things spoke Jesus to the multitudes in parables; and
without a parable spoke he not to them; [13:35]that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth
in parables; I will declare things which have been concealed from the
foundation of the world.

6 [13:36]Then leaving the multitudes; he went into the house, and his
disciples came to him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the
poisonous darnel of the field. [13:37]And he answered and said to them,
He that sows the good seed is the Son of man; [13:38]the field is the
world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; the poisonous
darnel are the children of the wicked one; [13:39] the enemy that sowed
them is the devil; the harvest is the consummation of the world; and
the reapers are angels.  [13:40]As, therefore, poisonous darnel is
collected and burned with fire, so shall it be at the consummation of
the world.  [13:41]The Son of man will send his angels, and they shall
collect out of his kingdom all offenses, and all that commit
wickedness, [13:42]and cast them into a furnace of fire; and there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. [13:43] Then the righteous
shall shine out like the sun, in the kingdom of their Father. He that
has ears, let him hear.

7 [13:44]The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field, which
a man found, and concealed, and went away with joy, and sold all that
he had and bought that field. [13:45]Again; the kingdom of heaven is
like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls, [13:46]who, finding one very
costly, went and sold all that he had and bought it. [13:47]Again; the
kingdom of heaven is like a net cast into the sea, and collecting
[fish] of every kind, [13:48]which, when it was full, men drew to the
shore, and sifting down put up the good in vessels and cast the bad
away.  [13:49]So shall it be at the consummation of the world. The
angels shall come forth and separate the evil from the midst of the
good, [13:50]and cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. [13:51]Have you understood all these
thing? They said to him, Yes, Lord.  [13:52]And he said to them, Every
scribe therefore that is instructed in the kingdom of heaven, is like a
householder who casts out of his treasury things new and old.

8 [13:53]And when Jesus had finished these parables he departed thence,
[13:54] and coming to his native country he taught them in their
synagogues, so that they were astonished and said, Whence has this man
this wisdom and these mighty works? [13:55]Is not this the carpenter's
son? Is not his mother called Mary? And are not his brothers James, and
Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?  [13:56]And are not his sisters all with
us? Whence then has this man all these things? [13:57]And they were
offended with him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without
honor, except in his native country, and in his own house; [13:58] and
he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.




CHAPTER XII. THE DEATH OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.--CHRIST FEEDING FIVE THOUSAND, AND WALKING ON THE LAKE.


1 [14:1]AT that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
[14:2]and said to his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is raised
from the dead; and on that account the mighty works are performed by
him. [14:3]For Herod having seized John, had bound him, and put him in
prison, on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife. [14:4]For
John had said to him, It is not lawful for you to have her. [14:5]And
he wished to kill him; but feared the people, because they regarded him
as a prophet.  [14:6]And Herod's birthday being kept, the daughter of
Herodias danced before them and pleased Herod, [14:7]on account of
which he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask;
[14:8]and she, having been put forward by her mother, said, Give me
here on a plate the head of John the Baptist.

2 [14:9]And the king was sorry; but on account of the oath, and those
reclining with him, he commanded it to be given. [14:10]And he sent and
beheaded John in the prison; [14:11]and his head was brought on a plate
and given to the girl, and she carried it to her mother. [14:12]And his
disciples went and took up the body and buried it, and came and told
Jesus.

3 [14:13]And when Jesus heard of it he departed thence in a ship to a
solitary place by himself. And the multitudes hearing of it followed
him on foot from the cities.

4 [14:14]And going out he saw a great multitude, and had compassion on
them, and cured their sick. [14:15]And when it was evening his
disciples came to him, saying, The place is solitary, and the hour is
already past; dismiss the multitudes that they may go to the villages
and buy themselves food. [14:16]But Jesus said to them, They need not
go away; give them food to eat.  [14:17]And they said to him, We have
here only five loaves and two fishes. [14:18]And he said, Bring them
here to me. [14:19]And commanding the multitudes to sit down on the
grass, he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and, looking up to
heaven, blessed them, and having broken them gave the bread to the
disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes. [14:20]And they all eat
and were filled; and they took up the fragments which remained over,
twelve travelling-baskets full; [14:21]and those that eat were about
five thousand men, besides women and children.

5 [14:22]And he immediately constrained the disciples to go into a ship
and go before him to the other side, till he should dismiss the
multitudes. [14:23]And having dismissed the multitudes, he went on a
mountain by himself to pray. And when it was evening he was there
alone. [14:24]But the ship was now in the midst of the lake tossed by
the waves, for the wind was contrary. [14:25]And in the fourth watch of
the night he came to them walking on the lake. [14:26]And when the
disciples saw him walking on the lake, they were troubled and said, It
is an apparition; and they cried out for fear. [14:27]But Jesus
immediately spoke to them, saying, Be of good courage; it is I; be not
afraid. [14:28]And Peter answered and said to him, Lord, if it is you,
command me to come to you on the waters. [14:29]And he said, Come. And
Peter going down from the ship walked on the waters to go to Jesus.
[14:30]But seeing the wind strong he was afraid; and beginning to sink,
cried, saying, Lord save me!  [14:31]and Jesus immediately stretching
out his hand, took hold of him and said, Man of little faith, why did
you doubt?  [14:32]And when they entered into the ship, the wind
ceased; [14:33]and those in the ship came and worshipped him; saying,
Truly you are the Son of God.

6 [14:34]And having crossed over, they came to Gennesaret.  [14:35]And
when the men of that place knew him, they sent to all the country
around, and brought to him all that were sick, [14:36]and requested of
him that they might only touch the fringe of his garment; and as many
as touched it were entirely cured.




CHAPTER XIII. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF JEWISH TRADITIONS, ETC.


1 [15:1]THEN came the scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem, saying,
[15:2]Why do your disciples transgress the tradition of the elders, for
they wash not their hands when they eat bread?  [15:3]And he answered
and said to them, Why do you transgress the command of God by your
tradition? [15:4]For God said, Honor your father and mother; and he
that reviles father or mother, let him surely die. [15:5]But you say,
Whoever says to his father or mother what you might be profited with by
me is a gift, [15:6]then he shall not honor his father or his mother;
and you have made the law of God of no effect by your tradition. [15:7]
Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying; [15:8]This people
honors me with the lips, but their heart is far from me.  [15:9]But in
vain do they worship me, teaching teachings and commandments of men.

2 [15:10]And having called the multitude, he said, Hear and understand.
[15:11] Not that which enters into the mouth, defiles the man; but that
which proceeds out of the mouth that defiles the man. [15:12]Then the
disciples came to him, and said to him, Do you know that the Pharisees
were offended when they heard this word? [15:13]And he answered and
said, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. [15:14]Let them go; they are blind guides of the blind. But
if the blind lead the blind, they will both fall into the pit.
[15:15]And Peter answered and said to him, Explain the parable to us.
[15:16]And he said, Are you so entirely without understanding?
[15:17]Do you not understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes
into the stomach, and is cast out on the earth? [15:18]But the things
which proceed from the mouth come from the heart, and these defile the
man. [15:19]For from the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies:
[15:20]these are the things which defile the man; but to eat with
unwashed hands does not defile the man.

3 [15:21]And Jesus going out thence departed to the regions of Tyre and
Sidon. [15:22]And behold, a woman of Canaan from those regions came out
and cried, saying, Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David; my daughter is
badly affected with a demon. [15:23]But he answered her not a word. And
his disciples came and asked him, saying, Dismiss her, for she cries
after us. [15:24]But he answered and said, I am not sent, except to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. [15:25]And she came and worshipped
him, saying, Lord, help me! [15:26]But he answered and said, It is not
right to take the children's bread and cast to the dogs. [15:27]But she
said, Yes, Lord; for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from
the table of their masters. [15:28]Then Jesus answered and said to her,
O woman, great is your faith! Be it to you as you wish; and her
daughter was cured from that hour.

4 [15:29]And returning thence Jesus came to the lake of Galilee, and
going up on the mountain sat down there. [15:30]And great multitudes
came to him, having with them the lame, the blind, the dumb, the
crippled, and many others; and they cast them at Jesus' feet, and he
cured them; [15:31]so that the multitude wondered, seeing the dumb
talk, the crippled sound, the lame walk, and the blind see; and they
glorified the God of Israel.

5 [15:32]And Jesus calling his disciples, said, I pity the multitude,
for it is now three days that they have continued with me, and they
have nothing to eat; I will not dismiss them fasting lest they faint by
the way. [15:33]But his disciples said to him, Whence shall we obtain
so much bread in the wilderness as to fill so great a multitude?
[15:34]And Jesus said to them, How many loaves have you? And they said,
Seven, and a few small fishes.  [15:35]And he commanded the people to
sit down on the ground, [15:36]and taking the seven loaves and the
fishes, and giving thanks, he broke, and gave them to the disciples,
and the disciples to the multitudes. [15:37]And they all eat and were
filled; and they took up the fragments that remained, seven
store-baskets full. [15:38]And those who eat were four thousand men,
besides women and children. [15:39]And dismissing the multitude he went
into the ship, and came into the bounds of Magadan.




CHAPTER XIV. CHRIST REPLYING TO THE PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES, ETC.


1 [16:1]AND the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to Jesus to try him
desired him to show them a sign from heaven. [16:2]But he answered and
said to them, When it is evening you say, It will be fair weather for
the sky is red; [16:3]and in the morning, It will rain to-day for the
sky is red and lowering. You know how to distinguish the face of the
sky, but you cannot distinguish the signs of the times. [16:4]An evil
and adulterous generation seeks a sign; and no sign shall be given it
except the sign of Jonah.  And he left them and departed.

2 [16:5]And when his disciples came to the other side they forgot to
take bread. [16:6]And Jesus said to them, Observe and beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees. [16:7]But they reasoned within
themselves, saying, It is because we have not taken bread. [16:8]But
Jesus knowing it, said, Why do you reason within yourselves, men of
little faith, because you have not taken bread? [16:9]Do you not yet
understand nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how
many travelling-baskets you took up? [16:10]nor the seven loaves of the
four thousand, and how many store-baskets you took up? [16:11]Why do
you not understand that I spoke to you not of bread, to beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees? [16:12]Then they understood that
he did not tell them to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the
teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

3 [16:13]And Jesus coming into the parts of Cesarea Philippi, asked his
disciples, saying, Who do men say that the Son of man is? [16:14]And
they said, Some, John the Baptist; others, Elijah; and others,
Jeremiah, or one of the prophets. [16:15]And he said to them, Who say
you that I am? [16:16]And Simon Peter answered and said, You are the
Christ, the Son of the living God. [16:17] And Jesus answered and said
to him, Blessed are you, Simon, son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has
not revealed this to you, but my Father in heaven. [16:18] And I tell
you that you are Peter [a rock], and upon this rock will I build my
assembly, and the gates of hades shall not prevail against it.
[16:19]And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and
whatever you bind on the earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever
you unbind on the earth shall be unbound in heaven. [16:20]Then he
charged his disciples to tell no man that he was the Christ.

4 [16:21]From that time Jesus began to show his disciples that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders, and chief
priests, and scribes, and be killed, and raised on the third day.
[16:22]And Peter taking hold of him said, rebuking him, Far be it from
you, Lord! This shall not be to you.  [16:23]But he turned and said to
Peter, Get behind me, Satan! You are an offense to me! For you regard
not the things of God, but those of men.

5 [16:24]Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any one will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
[16:25]For whoever wishes to save his life shall lose it, and whoever
loses his life for my sake, shall find it. [16:26]For what is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world and lose his life? Or what
will a man give as an exchange for his life?  [16:27]For the Son of man
is about to come in the glory of his Father, with his angels, and then
shall he render to every one according to his doing. [16:28]I tell you
truly, that some of those standing here shall not taste death till they
see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.




CHAPTER XV. CHRIST TRANSFIGURED.--CURING A DEMONIAC, AND PAYING THE SACRED TRIBUTE.


1 [17:1]AND after six days Jesus took Peter, and James, and John, his
brother, and led them up on a high mountain by themselves.  [17:2]And
he was transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and
his garments were white as the light. [17:3]And behold there appeared
to them Moses and Elijah conversing with him. [17:4]And Peter answered
and said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here; if you please,
we will make here three tabernacles, one for you, and one for Moses,
and one for Elijah.  [17:5]While he was yet speaking, behold a bright
cloud overshadowed them; and behold a voice from the cloud, saying,
This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; hear him.
[17:6]And when they heard this the disciples fell on their faces, and
were greatly afraid. [17:7]And Jesus came and touched them, and said,
Arise, and be not afraid. [17:8]And lifting up their eyes they saw no
man, except Jesus alone.

2 [17:9]And when they went down from the mountain Jesus charged them,
saying, Tell no man the vision till the Son of man is raised from the
dead. [17:10]And the disciples asked him, saying, Why then do the
scribes say that Elijah must first come?  [17:11]And he answered and
said, Elijah indeed comes, and shall restore all things. [17:12]But I
tell you Elijah has come already, and they knew him not, but did to him
what they pleased.  In like manner, also, the Son of man is about to
suffer from them. [17:13]Then the disciples understood that he spoke to
them of John the Baptist.

3 [17:14]And when they came to the multitude, a man came to him,
kneeling to him and saying, [17:15]Lord, have mercy on my son, for he
is a lunatic, and suffers greatly. For he often falls into the fire,
and often into the water. [17:16]And I brought him to your disciples
and they could not cure him. [17:17] Jesus answered and said, O
unbelieving and perverse generation! How long shall I be with you? How
long shall I suffer you? Bring him here to me. [17:18]And Jesus rebuked
him, and the demon went out of him, and the child was cured from that
hour. [17:19]Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, Why
could we not cast it out? [17:20]And Jesus said to them, On account of
your unbelief. For I tell you truly, if you have a faith like a mustard
seed, you shall say to this mountain, Be removed thence to that place,
and it shall be removed; and nothing shall be impossible to you.
[17:21]But this kind goes not out, except by prayer and fasting.

4 [17:22]And as they were returning in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The
Son of man is about to be delivered into the hands of men, [17:23]and
they will kill him, and on the third day he shall be raised; and they
were grieved exceedingly.

5 [17:24]And when they came to Capernaum, those who received the
didrachma [28 cents], came to Peter, and said, Does not your teacher
pay the didrachma? [17:25]He said, Yes. And when he came into the
house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What do you think, Simon? From
whom do the kings of the earth receive taxes, or a tribute? From their
children, or from strangers? [17:26]He said to him, From strangers.
Jesus said to him; Then are the children free; [17:27]but that we may
not offend them, go to the lake, and cast in a hook, and take the first
fish that comes up, and opening its mouth you will find a stater [56
cents]. Take that and give it to them, for me and you.




CHAPTER XVI. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF GREATNESS.--OFFENSES AND THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.


1 [18:1]AT that time the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? [18:2]And calling a little child, he
set it in the midst of them, [18:3]and said, I tell you truly, that if
you do not turn and become like little children, you can by no means
enter into the kingdom of heaven.  [18:4]Whoever humbles himself like
this little child, shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven;
[18:5]and whoever receives one such little child in my name, receives
me; [18:6]but whoever offends one of these little ones that believe in
me, it would be better for him that a millstone should be hung to his
neck, and that he should be plunged into the depths of the sea.

2 [18:7]Woe to the world because of offenses! For offenses must
necessarily come, but woe to that man by whom the offense comes!
[18:8]If your hand or foot offends you, cut it off and cast it from
you. It is better for you to enter into life lame, or crippled, than
having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
[18:9]And if your eye offends you, pluck it out and cast it from you.
It is better for you to enter into life having one eye, than having two
eyes to be cast into the hell of fire.

3 [18:10]See that you despise not one of these little ones; for I tell
you that their angels always behold the face of my Father in heaven.
[18:12]What think you? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them is
lost, does he not leave the ninety-nine on the mountain, and go and
seek for the lost one? [18:13]And if he finds it, I tell you truly that
he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which were not lost.
[18:14]So it is not the will of your Father in heaven that one of these
little ones should perish.

4 [18:15]But if your brother sins against you, go and reprove him
between you and him alone. If he hears you, you have gained your
brother. [18:16]But if he does not hear you, take with you one or two
more, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established; [18:17]and if he will not hear them, tell the assembly;
and if he will not hear the assembly, let him be to you as a gentile
and a publican. [18:18]I tell you truly, that whatever you bind on the
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you unbind on the earth
shall be unbound in heaven.  [18:19]Again, I tell you, that if two of
you shall agree on the earth concerning any thing for which they shall
ask, they shall have it from my Father in heaven; [18:20]for where two
or three are assembled together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.

5 [18:21]Then came Peter and said to him, Lord, how many times shall my
brother sin against me and I forgive him? Till seven times?
[18:22]Jesus said to him, I say not to you till seven times, but till
seventy times seven. [18:23]On this account, the kingdom of heaven is
like a king who wished to settle with his servants. [18:24]And
beginning to settle, a debtor of ten thousand talents [$10,000,000] was
brought to him. [18:25]And he having nothing to pay, the lord commanded
him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and
payment to be made.  [18:26]Then the servant fell down and worshipped
him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay all. [18:27]And the
lord of that servant having compassion on him released him, and forgave
him the debt.

6 [18:28]But that servant went out and found one of his fellow-servants
who owed him one hundred denarii [$14], and seizing him, he choked him,
saying, Pay what you owe me.  [18:29]Then his fellow-servant fell down
and besought him, saying, Have patience with me and I will pay you.
[18:30]But he would not; but went and cast him into prison till he
should pay the debt. [18:31]Then his fellow-servants seeing what was
done, were greatly displeased, and went and related to their lord all
things that were done. [18:32]Then his lord called him, and said to
him, Evil servant; I forgave you all that debt because you besought me
[to do it]. [18:33]Ought you not also to pity your fellow-servant, as I
pitied you? [18:34]And his lord was displeased, and delivered him to
the tormentors till he should pay all the debt. [18:35]So also will my
heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not each one his brother from
your hearts.




CHAPTER XVII. CHRIST'S DOCTRINE OF MARRIAGE, DIVORCE, ETC.


1 [19:1]AND when Jesus had finished these words he departed from
Galilee, and came into the bounds of Judea beyond the Jordan; [19:2]and
great multitudes followed him, and he cured them there.  [19:3]And the
Pharisees came to him to try him, and said, Is it lawful [for a man] to
put away his wife for every cause?  [19:4]And he answered and said,
Have you not read that the Creator at the beginning made them male and
female? [19:5]and he said, On this account shall a man leave his father
and mother, and be joined to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh.
[19:6]So that they are no longer two but one flesh. What therefore God
has yoked together, let not man separate.

2 [19:7]They said to him, Why then did Moses command us to give a bill
of divorcement, and put her away? [19:8]He said to them, Moses, on
account of your hardness of heart, allowed you to put away your wives;
but from the beginning it was not so. [19:9]And I tell you, that
whoever puts away his wife, except for adultery, and marries another,
commits adultery; and whoever marries her that is put away, commits
adultery.

3 [19:10]The disciples said to him, If the case of a man is thus with
his wife, it is not expedient to marry. [19:11]And he said to them, All
do not receive this word, but those to whom it is given. [19:12]For
there are eunuchs from birth, who were born so from their mother; and
there are eunuchs who are made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs
who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven.
He that is able to receive [this doctrine] let him receive it.

4 [19:13]Then little children were brought to him that he should put
his hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them.  [19:14]But
Jesus said, Suffer the little children to come to me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.  [19:15]And he put his hands
on them and departed thence.

5 [19:16]And behold one came and said to him, Teacher, what good [work]
shall I do that I may have eternal life? [19:17]And he said to him, Why
do you ask me of the good? one is the good. But if you wish to enter
into life, keep the commandments. [19:18]He said to him, What? And
Jesus said, this; You shall not kill; You shall not commit adultery;
You shall not steal; You shall not testify falsely; [19:19]Honor your
father and mother; and you shall love your neighbor as yourself.
[19:20]The young man said to him, All these have I kept; what do I lack
yet? [19:21]Jesus said to him, If you will be perfect, go and sell your
property, and give to the poor, and you shall have a treasure in
heaven; and come and follow me. [19:22]And when the young man heard
[this] he went away sad, for he had great possessions.

6 [19:23]And Jesus said to his disciples, I tell you truly, that a rich
man will enter into the kingdom of heaven with difficulty.  [19:24]And
again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
[19:25]And the disciples hearing this, were greatly astonished, and
said, Who then can be saved? [19:26]But Jesus looking on them, said,
With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.

7 [19:27]Then Peter answered and said, Behold we have left all and
followed you; what shall we have therefore? [19:28]And Jesus said to
them, I tell you truly, that you who have followed me, in the
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory,
shall yourselves also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel; [19:29]and whoever has left brothers or sisters, or a father
or mother, or children, or lands or houses, for my name's sake, shall
receive many times as much, and inherit eternal life. [19:30]But many
first shall be last; and last, first.

8 [20:1]For the kingdom of heaven is like a householder who went out
early in the morning to hire laborers in his vineyard.  [20:2]And
agreeing with the laborers for a denarius [14 cents] a day, he sent
them into his vineyard. [20:3] And going out about the third hour, he
saw others standing idle in the market; [20:4]and he said to them, go
also into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you. And they
went. [20:5]Again going out about the sixth and ninth hours, he did
likewise.  [20:6]And going out about the eleventh hour he found others
standing, and said to them, Why stand you all the day idle?  [20:7]They
said to him, Because no man has hired us. He said to them, Go also into
the vineyard. [20:8]And when it was evening the lord of the vineyard
said to his steward, Call the laborers, and pay them the wages
[stipulated], beginning from the last even to the first. [20:9]And
those who came about the eleventh hour, received a denarius [14 cents]
each. [20:10]And those who came first supposed that they should receive
more. And they also received a denarius [14 cents] each; [20:11]and
when they had received it, they complained of the householder,
[20:12]saying, These last have worked but one hour, and you have made
them equal with us, who have borne the burden and heat of the day.
[20:13]But he answered and said to one of them, Neighbor, I do you no
wrong. Did you not agree with me for a denarius [14 cents]? [20:14]Take
what belongs to you, and go, for I will give to the last even as to
you. [20:15]Is it not right for me to do what I will with my own? Is
your eye evil because I am good?  [20:16]So the last shall be first,
and the first last.

9 [20:17]And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took his twelve disciples
aside privately, and said to them on the way, [20:18]Behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests
and scribes, and they will condemn him to death, [20:19]and deliver him
to the gentiles, to mock, and scourge, and crucify him; and on the
third day he shall be raised.

10 [20:20]Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her
sons, worshipping, and asking a certain thing of him.  [20:21]And he
said to her, What do you wish? She said to him, Say that these my two
sons shall sit, one on your right hand, and the other on your left, in
your kingdom. [20:22]But Jesus answered and said, You know not what you
ask. Can you drink of the cup of which I am about to drink? They said
to him, We can. [20:23]He said to them; you shall drink indeed of my
cup; but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give,
but to those for whom it is prepared by my Father. [20:24]And the ten
hearing this were displeased with the two brothers. [20:25]But Jesus
called them to him, and said, You know that the rulers of the gentiles
exercise lordship over them, and the great exercise authority over
them; but it shall not be so among you. [20:26]But whoever wishes to be
great among you, let him be your minister; [20:27]and whoever wishes to
be first among you, let him be your servant, [20:28]as the Son of man
came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for
many.




CHAPTER XVIII. CHRIST CURING TWO BLIND MEN.--ENTERING JERUSALEM IN TRIUMPH, AND CURSING THE FIG TREE.

1 [20:29]AND as they proceeded from Jericho a great multitude followed
him. [20:30]And behold two blind men who sat by the way, hearing that
Jesus was passing by cried, saying, Have mercy on us Lord, Son of
David! [20:31]And the multitude charged them to be still; but they
cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us Lord, Son of David! [20:32]And
Jesus stopped, and called them and said, What do you wish me to do for
you? [20:33]They said to him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
[20:34]And Jesus having compassion on them, touched their eyes; and
immediately they recovered their sight and followed him.

2 [21:1]And when they approached Jerusalem, and came to Bethphage, at
the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, [21:2]and said to
them, Go into the village opposite to you, and you will immediately
find an ass tied, and a colt with her; untie them, and lead them to me:
[21:3]and if any one asks you why, say that the Lord has need of them,
and he will immediately send them. [21:4] But all this was done that
the words spoken by the prophet might be fulfilled, who says;
[21:5]Tell the daughter of Zion, Behold, your king comes to you, meek,
seated on an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.

3 [21:6]And the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them,
[21:7]and brought the ass and the colt, and put garments on them, and
he sat on them. [21:8]And a vast multitude spread their garments in the
way, and others cut branches from the trees and scattered them in the
way; [21:9]and the multitudes that went before, and those that
followed, cried saying, Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord!  Hosanna in the highest [heavens]!

4 [21:10]And when he entered Jerusalem the whole city was moved,
saying, Who is this? [21:11]And the multitude said, This is Jesus, the
prophet who is from Nazareth of Galilee. [21:12]And Jesus entered into
the temple of God, and cast out all that sold and bought in the temple,
and overturned the tables of the brokers, and the seats of those that
sold doves, [21:13]and said to them, It is written, my house shall be
called a house of prayer; but you make it a den of robbers.

5 [21:14]And the blind and crippled came to him in the temple, and he
cured them. [21:15]And when the chief priests and scribes saw the
wonderful works which he performed, and the children crying in the
temple and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David!  they were displeased,
[21:16]and said to him, Do you hear what these say? And Jesus said to
them, Yes. Have you never read, that out of the mouths of babes and
nursing infants, you have perfected praise? [21:17]And he left them,
and went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.

6 [21:18]And returning into the city in the morning he was hungry;
[21:19]and seeing a fig tree by the way he went to it, and found
nothing on it, except leaves only, and he said to it, Let there be no
fruit on you forever. And the fig tree immediately withered, [21:20]and
the disciples seeing it, wondered and said, How soon is this fig tree
withered!  [21:21]Jesus answered and said to them, I tell you truly,
that if you have faith and doubt not, you shall not only do this of the
fig tree, but if you should say to this mountain, Be taken up and be
cast into the sea, it would be done; [21:22]and all things whatever
which you ask in prayer believing, you shall receive.




CHAPTER XIX. CHRIST QUESTIONED BY THE CHIEF PRIESTS AND ELDERS. THE PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD.


1 [21:23]AND Jesus having gone into the temple, the chief priests and
elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, By what
authority do you do these things? and who gave you this authority?
[21:24]Jesus answered and said to them, I also will ask you one
question, which, if you tell me, I will tell you by what authority I do
these things. [21:25]Whence was the baptism of John? from heaven or
from men? And they reasoned within themselves, saying, If we say from
heaven, he will say to us, Why did you not believe him? [21:26]But if
we say from men, we fear the multitude, for all regard John as a
prophet. [21:27] And they answered Jesus, and said, We do not know. And
he said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these
things.

2 [21:28]But what do you think? A man had two sons; and he went to the
first, and said, Son, go and work to-day in the vineyard.  [21:29]But
he answered and said, I will not; but afterwards he repented, and went.
[21:30]And he came to the other, and said the same. And he answered and
said, I will go sir, but went not.  [21:31]Which of the two did the
will of the father? They said to him, The first. Jesus said to them, I
tell you truly, that the publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of
God before you.  [21:32]For John came to you in a way of righteousness,
and you believed him not; but the publicans and harlots believed him;
and when you saw this, you did not afterwards repent, that you might
believe him.

3 [21:33]Hear another parable: There was a man, a householder, who
planted a vineyard, and made a hedge around it, and dug a wine vat in
it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad.
[21:34]And when the time of the fruits approached he sent his servants
to the husbandmen to receive his fruits. [21:35]And the husbandmen took
his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
[21:36]Again he sent other servants more than the first; and they
treated them in the same manner. [21:37]And afterwards he sent them his
son, saying, They will reverence my son. [21:38]But when the husbandmen
saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us
kill him and take his inheritance. [21:39]And they took him, and cast
him out of the vineyard, and killed him. [21:40]When, therefore, the
lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those husbandmen?
[21:41]They said to him, He will inflict on those men a miserable
death, and let out his vineyard to other husbandmen, who will render
him the fruits in their seasons.

4 [21:42]Jesus said to them, Have you never read in the Scriptures, The
stone which the builders rejected, the same has become the head of a
corner? this is from the Lord, and is wonderful in our eyes? [21:43]I
tell you, therefore, that the kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given to a nation yielding its fruits.

5 [21:45]And the chief priests and Pharisees hearing his parables, knew
that he spoke of them; [21:46]and they sought to take him, but feared
the people, because they regarded him as a prophet.




CHAPTER XX. THE PARABLE OF THE WEDDING, AND QUESTIONS OF THE PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES.


1 [22:1]AND Jesus answered and spoke to them again in parables saying,
[22:2] The kingdom of heaven is like a man, a king, who made a wedding
for his son. [22:3]And he sent his servants to call the invited to the
wedding, and they would not come.  [22:4]Again he sent other servants,
saying, Tell the invited, Behold, I have prepared my supper, my oxen
and fatted creatures are killed, and all things are ready; come to the
wedding.  [22:5]But they neglected it, and went away, one to his farm,
and another to his merchandise; [22:6]and the rest took his servants
and treated them injuriously, and killed them. [22:7]And the king was
angry, and sent his armies and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up
their city.

2 [22:8]Then he said to his servants, The wedding indeed is ready, but
the invited were not worthy. [22:9]Go, therefore, to the crossings of
the ways, and invite all you find to the wedding. [22:10]And those
servants went out into the highways, and collected all whom they found,
both bad and good, and the wedding was furnished with guests.

3 [22:11]And the king coming in to see the guests observed there a man
who had not on a wedding garment, [22:12]and said to him, Friend, how
came you in here not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.
[22:13]Then the king said to the servants, Bind his feet and hands, and
cast him into the darkness outside. There shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. [22:14]For many are called, but few chosen.

4 [22:15]Then the Pharisees went and took counsel to ensnare him in his
words. [22:16]And they sent to him their disciples, with the Herodians,
saying, Teacher, we know that you are true, and teach the way of God in
truth, and care not for any man; for you regard not the face of men.
[22:17]Tell us, therefore, what you think; is it right to pay tribute
to Caesar or not? [22:18]Jesus knowing their wickedness, said, Why do
you hypocrites try me?  [22:19]Show me the tribute money. And they
brought him a denarius [14 cents]. [22:20]And he said to them, Whose is
this image and this inscription? [22:21]They said to him, Caesar's.
Then he said to them, Give therefore Caesar's dues to Caesar, and God's
to God. [22:22]And hearing, they wondered, and went away and left him.

5 [22:23]On that day the Sadducees came to him, who say there is no
resurrection, and asked him, [22:24]saying, Teacher, Moses said, If any
one dies having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and
raise up children for his brother. [22:25]Now there were with us seven
brothers; and the first married, and died; and having no children he
left his wife to his brother; [22:26]in like manner also the second,
and third, till the seventh; [22:27] last of all the woman died also.
[22:28]In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife will she be of the
seven? for they all had her. [22:29]And Jesus answered and said to
them, You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
[22:30]For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are married, but
are as angels in heaven. [22:31]But concerning the resurrection of the
dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, saying, [22:32]I
am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God
is not a God of the dead, but of the living.  [22:33]And the multitudes
who heard were astonished at his teaching.

6 [22:34]And the Pharisees hearing that he had silenced the Sadducees,
were assembled together, [22:35]and one of them, a lawyer, asked him,
to try him, [22:36]Teacher, what is the great commandment in the law?
[22:37]And he said to him, You shall love the Lord your God with all
your heart, and all your soul, and all your mind. [22:38]This is the
great and first commandment.  [22:39]And the second is like it, You
shall love your neighbor as yourself. [22:40]On these two commandments
hang all the law and the prophets.

7 [22:41]And the Pharisees being assembled together, Jesus asked them,
[22:42] saying, What do you think of the Christ? whose son is he? They
said to him, David's. [22:43]He said to them, How then does David in
spirit call him Lord, saying, [22:44]The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on
my right hand till I make your enemies your footstool? [22:45]If then
David calls him Lord, how is he his son? [22:46]And no one was able to
answer him a word, neither dared any one after that day to question him
farther.




CHAPTER XXI. CHRIST DENOUNCING THE SCRIBES AND PHARISEES.


1 [23:1]THEN Jesus spoke to the multitudes and his disciples,
[23:2]saying, The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat.  [23:3]All
things therefore which they tell you, do and keep. But do not their
works. For they say and do not, [23:4]but bind heavy burdens and put
them on the shoulders of men, but will not move them with their finger.
[23:5]And they do all their works to be seen by men. For they make
broad their prayer fillets, and enlarge the fringes, [23:6] and love
the first tables at feasts, and the first seats in the synagogues,
[23:7]and salutations in the markets, and to be called by men, Rabbi.
[23:8] But do not you be called Rabbi; For one is your teacher, and you
are all brothers. [23:9]And call no man your father on the earth, for
one is your heavenly Father. [23:10]Neither be called leaders, for one
is your leader, the Christ. [23:11]But the greatest of you shall be
your servant, [23:12]and whoever exalts himself shall be humbled, and
he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

2 [23:13]But woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you shut
up the kingdom of heaven before men; for you enter not into it, neither
do you suffer those entering to go in.  [23:15]Woe to you scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! For you compass the sea and the dry land to make
one proselyte; and when he is gained you make him twice as much a child
of hell as yourselves. [23:16]Woe to you blind guides, who say, Whoever
swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of
the temple, he is bound. [23:17]Fools and blind! for which is greater,
the gold, or the temple which sanctifies the gold? [23:18] If a man
swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if he swears by the gift which
is on it, he is bound. [23:19]Fools and blind! For which is greater,
the gift, or the altar which sanctifies the gift? [23:20]He then that
swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all things on it; [23:21]and
he that swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him that inhabits
it; [23:22]and he that swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God,
and by him that sits on it.

3 [23:23]Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe
mint, and anise, and cummin, and have neglected the weightier matters
of the law, justice, mercy, and faith. These you ought to do, and not
neglect the others. [23:24] Blind guides! who strain out a gnat and
swallow down a camel.  [23:25]Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you cleanse the outside of the cup and platter, but
within they are full of plunder and excess. [23:26]Blind Pharisee!
cleanse first that which is in the cup and platter, that its outside
may be clean also. [23:27]Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!
For you are like whitewashed tombs, which appear fair without, but
within are full of the bones of the dead and of all impurity.
[23:28]So also you on the outside appear just to men, but within you
are full of hypocrisy and wickedness. [23:29]Woe to you scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and
adorn the tombs of the righteous, [23:30]and say, If we had been in the
days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the prophets. [23:31]So that you testify to yourselves that
you are children of those who killed the prophets; [23:32]and you have
filled up the measure of your fathers. [23:33]Serpents, offspring of
vipers! How can you escape the judgment of hell?

4 [23:34]Therefore, behold, I send you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify; and some of them you
will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city;
[23:35]that all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood
of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah, son of Bararchiah, whom
you killed between the temple and the altar, may come upon you.
[23:36]I tell you truly, that all these [crimes] shall come on this
generation.

5 [23:37]Jerusalem, Jerusalem, killing the prophets, and stoning those
sent to you, how often would I have gathered your children together, as
a bird gathers her brood under her wings, but you would not!
[23:38]Behold, your house is left to you desolate; [23:39]for I tell
you that you shall not see me henceforth, till you say, Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord!




CHAPTER XXII. CHRIST PREDICTING THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF HIS KINGDOM.


1 [24:1]AND Jesus went out and departed from the temple; and his
disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.
[24:2]And he answered and said to them, Do you not see all these
things? I tell you truly, there shall not be left here stone upon stone
that shall not be thrown down. [24:3]And as he sat on the Mount of
Olives the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us when these
things shall be; and what shall be the sign of your coming, and of the
consummation of the world? [24:4]And Jesus answered and said to them,
See that no man deceives you; [24:5]for many shall come in my name,
saying, I am the Christ, and shall deceive many. [24:6]And you shall
hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that you be not terrified, for all
things must be accomplished; but the end is not yet. [24:7]For nation
shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall
be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in different places;
[24:8]but all these things are the beginning of sorrows.

2 [24:9]Then they shall deliver you to affliction, and kill you, and
you shall be hated by all nations on my account; [24:10]and then many
shall be offended, and shall betray one another, and hate one another;
[24:11]and many false prophets shall be raised up and deceive many,
[24:12]and because wickedness shall abound the love of the many shall
become cold: [24:13]but he that endures to the end shall be saved.
[24:14]And this good news of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world, for a testimony to all nations; and then shall the end come.

3 [24:15]When, therefore, you see the abomination of desolation, spoken
of by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place--let him that reads
understand,-- [24:16]then let those in Judea flee to the mountains.
[24:17]Let not him that is on his house come down to take the things
from his house; [24:18]and let not him that is in the field return back
to take his clothes; [24:19]and woe to those with child and giving
nurse in those days!  [24:20]But pray that your flight may not be in
the winter, nor on the Sabbath; [24:21]for at that time there shall be
great affliction, such as has not been from the beginning of the world
even till now, nor ever shall be. [24:22]And unless those days were
shortened no flesh would be saved: but on account of the elect those
days shall be shortened.

4 [24:23]Then if one says to you, Behold, here is the Christ, or there!
believe it not. [24:24]For false Christs and false prophets shall be
raised up, and shall show great signs and wonders, so as to deceive, if
possible, even the elect.  [24:25]Behold, I have told you before.
[24:26]If, therefore, they say to you, Behold he is in the wilderness,
go not forth; Behold he is in private rooms, believe it not. [24:27]For
as the lightning comes forth from the East, and shines even to the
West, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. [24:28] Wherever the
dead body is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

5 [24:29]And immediately after the affliction of those days the sun
shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.
[24:30]And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven; and
then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn; and they shall see the
Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
[24:31]And he shall send his angels with a loud sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather his elect from the four winds, from the one end of
heaven to the other.

6 [24:32]But learn the parable of the fig tree. When its branch is now
green, and puts forth leaves, you know that the summer is nigh.
[24:33]So also when you see all these things, know that [the Son of
man] is nigh, at the doors. [24:34]I tell you truly, that this
generation shall not pass away till all these things shall be
accomplished. [24:35]Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words
shall not pass away.

7 [24:36]But of that day and hour no man knows, nor the angels of
heaven; but my Father only. [24:37]And as the days of Noah, so shall
the coming of the Son of man be. [24:38]For as in the days before the
flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
till the day that Noah entered the ark, [24:39]and knew not till the
flood came and took them all away, so shall the coming of the Son of
man be. [24:40]Then two shall be in the field; one is taken and the
other left. [24:41]Two women shall be grinding at the mill; one is
taken and the other left.

8 [24:42]Watch, therefore, for you know not on what day your Lord
comes, [24:43]But know this, that if the householder had known in what
watch the thief comes, he would have watched, and not have suffered his
house to be broken into. [24:44]Therefore be you also ready, for in
such an hour as you think not the Son of man comes. [24:45]Who then is
the faithful and wise servant whom the Lord has placed over his family
to give them food in due season?  [24:46]Blessed is that servant whom
his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. [24:47]I tell you truly,
that he will place him over all his estates.

9 [24:48]But if that evil servant says in his heart, My Lord delays his
coming, [24:49]and begins to beat his fellow-servants, and eats and
drinks with drunkards, [24:50]the Lord of that servant will come on a
day when he looks not for him, and at an hour that he knows not of,
[24:51]and will punish him with the utmost severity, and appoint his
portion with hypocrites. There shall be weeping and gnashing of the
teeth.

10 [25:1]Then the kingdom of heaven shall be likened to ten virgins who
took their own lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom; [25:2]and
five of them were foolish, and five wise.  [25:3]The foolish took their
lamps and took no oil with them; [25:4]but the wise took oil in the
vessels with their lamps.  [25:5] And while the bridegroom delayed, all
slumbered and slept; [25:6]but at midnight there was a cry, Behold the
bridegroom; go out to meet him. [25:7]Then all those virgins arose and
trimmed their own lamps. [25:8]And the foolish said to the wise, Give
us of your oil, for our lamps have gone out. [25:9]But the wise
answered, saying, [No]; lest there be not enough for us and you; go
rather to those that sell, and buy for yourselves. [25:10]And while
they went to buy the bridegroom came; and the ready went in with him to
the wedding, and the door was shut. [25:11]And afterwards the other
virgins came, and said, Lord, Lord, open to us. [25:12]But he answered
and said, I tell you truly I know you not. [25:13]Watch, therefore, for
you know not the day nor the hour.

11 [25:14]For, as a man going abroad called his servants, and delivered
to them his estates; [25:15]to one he gave five talents [$5,000], to
another two [$2,000], and to another one [$1,000]; to each according to
his ability, and immediately went abroad.  [25:16]And he that received
the five talents went and traded with them, and made other five;
[25:17]in like manner, also, he that received the two gained two
others; [25:18]but he that received the one went away and dug in the
earth and hid his lord's money.  [25:19]And after a long time the lord
of those servants came, and had a settlement with them. [25:20] And he
that received the five talents came and brought five other talents,
saying, Lord, you committed to me five talents; behold, I have gained
five other talents. [25:21]His lord said to him, Well done, good and
faithful servant; you have been faithful over a few [talents], I will
place you over many: enter into the joy of your lord.  [25:22]And he
that received the two talents also came to him and said, Lord, you
committed to me two talents; behold, I have gained two others.
[25:23]His Lord said to him, Well done, good and faithful servant; you
have been faithful over a few [talents], I will place you over many:
enter into the joy of your lord.

12 [25:24]And he that received the one talent also came and said, Lord,
I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping where you have not sowed,
and gathering where you have not scattered, [25:25]and being afraid I
went away and hid your talent in the earth; behold, you have what is
yours. [25:26]And his Lord answered and said to him, Evil and slothful
servant, you knew that I reap where I have not sowed, and gather whence
I have not scattered?  [25:27]And you ought then to have given my money
to the brokers, and at my coming, I should have received my own with
interest.  [25:28]Take his talent, therefore, from him, and give it to
him that has ten talents; [25:29]for to every one that has shall be
given, and he shall have an abundance; but from him that has not, even
what he has shall be taken away; [25:30]and cast the unprofitable
servant into the darkness outside; there shall be weeping and gnashing
of the teeth.

13 [25:31]But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the
angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory,
[25:32]and all the nations shall be assembled before him, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from
the goats; [25:33]and he shall place the sheep on his right hand, and
the goats on his left.

14 [25:34]Then shall the king say to those on his right hand, Come,
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world; [25:35]for I was hungry and you gave me food;
I was thirsty and you gave me drink; I was a stranger and you took me
in; [25:36]naked and you clothed me; I was sick and you visited me; I
was in prison, and you came to me.  [25:37]Then shall the righteous
answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you? or
thirsty, and give you drink? [25:38]when did we see you a stranger, and
take you in? or naked, and clothe you? [25:39]when did we see you sick,
or in prison, and come to you? [25:40]And the king shall answer and say
to them, I tell you truly, that inasmuch as you have done it to one of
the least of these my brothers, you have done it to me.

15 [25:41]Then shall he say to those on his left hand, Depart from me
accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
[25:42]For I was hungry and you gave me no food; I was thirsty and you
gave me no drink; [25:43] a stranger, and you took me not in; sick and
in prison and you visited me not.  [25:44]Then shall they also answer
and say, Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger,
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not serve you? [25:45]Then he
shall answer them saying, I tell you truly, that inasmuch as you have
not done it to one of the least of these my brothers, you have not done
it to me. [25:46]And these shall go away into eternal punishment, but
the righteous into life eternal.




CHAPTER XXIII. CHRIST AT BETHANY, THE PASCHAL AND LORD'S SUPPER, ETC.


1 [26:1]WHEN Jesus had finished all these words he said to his
disciples, [26:2]You know that after two days is the passover, and the
Son of man is delivered up to be crucified. [26:3]Then the chief
priests and the elders of the people were assembled in the court of the
chief priest, who was called Caiaphas, [26:4]and they took counsel to
seize Jesus by stratagem, and kill him.  [26:5]But they said, Not at
the feast, lest there be a tumult among the people.

2 [26:6]And Jesus being at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
[26:7]a woman came to him having a vase of very costly ointment, and
poured it on his head, as he reclined. [26:8]And his disciples seeing
it were displeased, and said, Why is this waste? [26:9]This could have
been sold for much and given to the poor. [26:10]But Jesus knowing it,
said to them, Why do you trouble the woman? for she has done a good
work for me; [26:11]for the poor you always have with you, but me you
have not always. [26:12]For in putting this ointment on my body, she
has done it to prepare me for burial. [26:13]I tell you truly, that
wherever this good news is preached in all the word, what this woman
has done shall be told for a memorial of her.

3 [26:14]Then went one of the twelve called Judas Iscariot to the chief
priests, [26:15]and said, What will you give me to deliver him to you?
And they gave him thirty [shekels] of silver [$16.80]. [26:16]And from
that time he sought a good opportunity to deliver him up. [26:17]And on
the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying,
Where do you wish us to prepare for you to eat the passover? [26:18]And
he said, Go into the city to such a one, and say to him, The Teacher
says, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover with you, together
with my disciples. [26:19]And the disciples did as Jesus commanded
them, and prepared the passover; [26:20]and when it was evening he
reclined with the twelve. [26:21]And as they were eating, he said, I
tell you truly, that one of you will betray me.  [26:22]And being
grieved exceedingly, they each one began to say to him, Lord, is it I?
[26:23]But he answered and said, He that dips his hand with me in the
dish, he shall betray me. [26:24]The Son of man goes indeed, as it is
written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed!
it would be good for him if that man had not been born. [26:25]And
Judas, who betrayed him, answered and said, Is it I, Rabbi? He said to
him, As you say.

4 [26:26]And as they were eating Jesus took the bread, and having
blessed, broke and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is
my body. [26:27] And taking the cup, and giving thanks, he gave it to
them, saying, Drink you all of it; [26:28]this is my blood of the new
covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
[26:29]And I tell you that I will not drink henceforth of this product
of the vine, till that day when I drink it with you new in the kingdom
of my Father. [26:30]And having sung a hymn they went out to the Mount
of Olives.

5 [26:31]Then Jesus said to them, You will all be offended with me this
night; for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered; [26:32]but after I have risen I will go
before you into Galilee. [26:33]And Peter answered and said to him, If
all men shall be offended with you, I will not. [26:34]Jesus said to
him, I tell you truly, that this night, before the cock crows, you will
deny me thrice.  [26:35]Peter said to him, If it should be necessary
for me to die with you, I will by no means deny you. And all the
disciples said the same.




CHAPTER XXIV. CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE, AND BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM.


1 [26:36]THEN Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane, and
said to the disciples, Sit here, till I go and pray there.  [26:37]And
taking Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and
dejected. [26:38]Then he said to them, My soul is sorrowful even to
death; remain here and watch with me.  [26:39]And going forward a
little, he fell on his face, and prayed and said, My Father, if it is
possible let this cup pass from me; but not as I will, but as thou
wilt. [26:40]And he came to the disciples and found them sleeping, and
said to Peter, Are you so unable to watch with me one hour?
[26:41]Watch and pray that you enter not into trial; the spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

2 [26:42]Going away again a second time, he prayed, saying, My Father,
if this cup cannot pass from me unless I drink it, thy will be done.
[26:43]And he came and found them sleeping again, for their eyes were
heavy. [26:44]And leaving them, again he went away and prayed, saying
the same words. [26:45]Then he came to the disciples and said to them,
Do you sleep still and take your rest? Behold the hour is at hand, and
the Son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners. [26:46]Arise,
let us go; behold, he that betrays me is at hand.

3 [26:47]And while he was yet speaking, behold, Judas, one of the
twelve, came, and with him a great multitude, with swords and clubs,
from the chief priests and elders of the people.  [26:48]And he that
betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, The one that I shall kiss is he;
take him. [26:49]And immediately coming forward to Jesus, he said,
Hail, Rabbi, and kissed him.  [26:50]But Jesus said to him, Comrade,
for what have you come?  Then they came forward, and laid hands on
Jesus, and took him.  [26:51]And behold, one of those with Jesus,
stretching out his hand, drew his sword, and striking the servant of
the chief priest cut off his ear. [26:52]Then Jesus said to him, Put up
your sword in its place; for all who take the sword shall perish by the
sword. [26:53]Do you think that I could not ask my Father, and he would
furnish me more than twelve legions of angels?  [26:54]How then would
the Scriptures be accomplished, that it must be so?

4 [26:55]At that time Jesus said to the multitudes, Have you come out
as against a robber, with swords and clubs to take me? I sat daily
teaching in the temple, and you did not take me; [26:56]but all this
was done that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then the
disciples all forsook him and fled.  [26:57]And having taken Jesus,
they led him away to Caiaphas, the chief priest, where the scribes and
elders were assembled.  [26:58]But Peter followed him at a distance,
even to the court of the chief priest, and going in sat with the
officers to see the end.

5 [26:59]And the chief priests and all the sanhedrim sought false
testimony against Jesus to kill him, [26:60]and did not find it, though
many false witnesses came forward. But afterwards, two coming forward
[26:61]said, This man said, I can destroy the temple of God and build
it in three days. [26:62] And the chief priest rising up said to him,
Do you answer nothing? What do these testify against you? [26:63]But
Jesus was silent. And the chief priest answering, said to him, I adjure
you, by the living God, to tell me if you are the Christ, the Son of
God.  [26:64]Jesus said to him, As you say; but I tell you that
hereafter you shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the
power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.

6 [26:65]Then the chief priest rent his clothes, saying, He has
blasphemed; what further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now you
have heard the blasphemy. [26:66]What do you think? And they answered
and said, He is worthy of death. [26:67]Then they spit in his face, and
struck him with their fists, and some struck him with the palms of
their hands, [26:68]saying, Prophesy to us, Christ, who is it that
struck you?

7 [26:69]But Peter sat without in the court; and a female servant came
to him, saying, You also were with Jesus the Galilean.  [26:70]But he
denied it before all, saying, I know not what you say. [26:71]And going
out into the porch, another [female servant] saw him, and said to those
there, This man was also with Jesus the Nazoraean. [26:72]And again he
denied with an oath, saying, I know not the man. [26:73]But after a
little while those standing by came forward, and said to Peter,
Certainly you are also one of them, for your speech makes you manifest.
[26:74]Then he began to curse and swear, saying, I know not the man.
And immediately a cock crew; [26:75]and Peter remembered the word of
Jesus, who said, Before a cock crows you will deny me thrice; and he
went out and wept bitterly.




CHAPTER XXV. CHRIST BEFORE PONTIUS PILATE.


1 [27:1]AND when it was morning all the chief priests and the elders of
the people took counsel against Jesus to kill him.  [27:2]And having
bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate, the
procurator. [27:3]Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that he was
condemned, repenting, returned the thirty shekels of silver [$16.80] to
the chief priests and elders, [27:4] saying, I have sinned, betraying
innocent blood. But they said, What is that to us? see you to it.
[27:5]And throwing down the silver in the temple he departed; and
having gone away strangled himself.

2 [27:6]And the chief priests taking the silver said, It is not lawful
to put it into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.
[27:7]And taking counsel, they bought with it the potter's field for a
burying place for strangers. [27:8]For this reason, the field is called
a field of blood to this day. [27:9]Then was fulfilled the word spoken
by Jeremiah the prophet, saying; And they took the thirty shekels of
silver, the price of him that was prized, whom [men] from the sons of
Israel set a price upon, [27:10]and gave them for the potter's field,
as the Lord commanded me.

3 [27:11]And Jesus stood before the procurator; and the procurator
asked him, saying, Are you the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him,
As you say. [27:12] And when he was accused by the chief priests and
elders he answered nothing. [27:13]Then Pilate said to him, Do you not
hear how many things they testify against you? [27:14]And he answered
him not a word; so that the procurator wondered greatly.

4 [27:15]And at the feast the procurator was accustomed to release to
the multitude one prisoner, whom they chose; [27:16]and he then had a
noted prisoner called Barabbas.  [27:17]When, therefore, they were
assembled together, Pilate said to them, Which do you wish me to
release to you? Barabbas? or Jesus, called Christ? [27:18]For he knew
that they had delivered him up from envy. [27:19]And as he sat on the
tribunal his wife sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that
just man, for I have suffered much to-day on his account, from a dream.

5 [27:20]But the chief priests and elders persuaded the people to ask
for Barabbas, and to destroy Jesus. [27:21]And the procurator answered
and said to them, Which of the two do you wish me to release to you?
And they said, Barabbas. [27:22]Pilate said to them, What then shall I
do to Jesus, called Christ? They all said, Let him be crucified.
[27:23]But he said, [No]; for what evil has he done? And they cried
more vehemently, saying, Let him be crucified.

6 [27:24]And Pilate seeing that he accomplished nothing, but that
rather a tumult was made, took water and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this man; see you to
it. [27:25]And all the people answered and said, His blood be upon us
and upon our children. [27:26]Then he released Barabbas to them, and
having scourged Jesus delivered him up to be crucified.




CHAPTER XXVI. CHRIST'S DEATH AND BURIAL.


1 [27:27]THEN the soldiers of the procurator taking Jesus to the
Praetorium assembled about him the whole cohort, [27:28]and stripped
him, and put on him a crimson cloak, [27:29]and making a crown of
thorns they put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they
knelt before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
[27:30]And they spit on him, and took the reed and beat him on his
head. [27:31]And when they had mocked him, they took the cloak off from
him, and put on him his own clothes, and led him away to crucify him.

2 [27:32]And going out, they found a Cyrenian by the name of Simon,
whom they compelled to bear his cross. [27:33]And coming to a place
called Golgotha, which is called A place of a cranium, [27:34]they gave
him vinegar to drink mixed with gall; and when he had tasted of it he
would not drink.

3 [27:35]And having crucified him, they parted his garments, casting
lots, [27:36]and sat down and watched him there.  [27:37]And they put
over his head his accusation, written; THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE
JEWS. [27:38]Then two robbers were crucified with him, one on the right
hand, and the other on the left.

4 [27:39]And those who went by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,
[27:40]and saying, You that destroy the temple and build it in three
days, save yourself. If you are the Son of God, come down from the
cross. [27:41]And the chief priests in like manner also mocked him,
with the scribes and elders, and said, [27:42]He saved others, himself
he cannot save. If he is the king of Israel let him come down now from
the cross, and we will believe on him; [27:43]he trusted in God; let
him deliver him if he wishes for him; for he said, I am a Son of God.
[27:44]The robbers also that were crucified with him did the same, and
reproached him.  [27:45]And from the sixth hour there was darkness on
all the land till the ninth hour; [27:46]and at about the ninth hour
Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that
is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? [27:47]And some of those
standing there hearing him, said, He calls for Elijah.  [27:48]And one
of them ran immediately to him, and took a sponge, and filled it with
vinegar, and putting it on a reed gave it to him to drink. [27:49]But
the rest said, Let him alone; let us see if Elijah will come and save
him. [27:50]And Jesus crying again with a loud voice, gave up the
spirit.

5 [27:51]And behold, the vail of the temple was rent in two, from top
to bottom, and the earth was shaken, and the rocks rent, [27:52]and the
tombs were opened, and many bodies of saints that slept arose,
[27:53]and going out of the tombs, after his resurrection entered into
the holy city, and appeared to many.

6 [27:54]And the centurion and those with him watching Jesus, seeing
the earthquake, and the [other] events which occurred, were greatly
afraid, and said, Certainly, this was a Son of God.  [27:55]And there
were many women there, beholding from afar, who had followed Jesus from
Galilee, to wait upon him; [27:56]among whom were Mary the Magdalene,
and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of
Zebedee.

7 [27:57]And when it was evening a rich man came from Arimathea, by the
name of Joseph, who himself also was a disciple of Jesus; [27:58]this
man went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.  Then Pilate
commanded it to be given him; [27:59]and Joseph took the body, and
wrapped it in clean linen, [27:60] and placed it in a new tomb of his
which he had excavated in a rock, and having rolled a great stone to
the door of the tomb he went away; [27:61]and Mary the Magdalene and
the other Mary were there, sitting opposite to the tomb.




CHAPTER XXVII. CHRIST AFTER HIS RESURRECTION.


1 [27:62]AND on the next day, which is after the preparation, the chief
priests and Pharisees were assembled together to Pilate, [27:63]and
said, Sir, we remember that this deceiver said when he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise. [27:64]Command, therefore, the tomb to be
made safe till the third day, lest his disciples should come and steal
him, and say to the people, He is raised from the dead, and the last
error be worse than the first.  [27:65]Pilate said to them, You have a
guard; go and make it as safe as you can. [27:66]And they went and made
the tomb safe with a guard, having sealed the stone.

2 [28:1]And after the sabbath, when it began to dawn on the first day
of the week, came Mary the Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the
tomb. [28:2]And behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of
the Lord descending from heaven came and rolled away the stone and sat
upon it. [28:3]And his appearance was like lightning, and his clothing
as white as snow; [28:4]and from fear of him the keepers shook and
became like dead men. [28:5]And the angel answered and said to the
women, Fear not, for I know that you seek Jesus the crucified. [28:6]He
is not here, for he is raised, as he said. Come and see the place where
the Lord lay, [28:7]and go immediately and tell his disciples that he
is raised from the dead; and behold, he will go before you into
Galilee; there shall you see him. Behold, I have told you. [28:8]And
going out immediately from the tomb with fear and great joy, they ran
to tell his disciples.

3 [28:9]And behold, Jesus also met them, saying, Hail! And they
approached him, and took hold of his feet, and worshipped him.
[28:10]Then Jesus said to them, Fear not; go and tell my brothers to go
to Galilee, and there they shall see me. [28:11]And as they went,
behold, some of the guard came into the city and told the chief priests
all the things which had happened. [28:12]And being assembled with the
elders, and taking counsel, they gave large sums of money to the
soldiers, [28:13]saying, Say that his disciples came by night and stole
him while we slept; [28:14]and if this is heard of by the procurator we
will satisfy him and secure you. [28:15]And they took the silver and
did as they were told; and this report is circulated among the Jews to
this day.

4 [28:16]And the eleven disciples went to Galilee on the mountain where
Jesus had appointed them; [28:17]and they saw and worshipped him; but
some doubted. [28:18]And Jesus coming near spoke to them, saying, All
power is given me in heaven and on the earth; [28:19]go and disciple
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit; [28:20]teaching them to keep all things which I
have commanded you; and behold, I am with you always till the
consummation of the world.





