
Pansy was not in the first of the rooms, a large apartment with a
concave ceiling and walls covered with old red damask; it was here
Mrs. Osmond usually sat--though she was not in her most customary place
to-night--and that a circle of more especial intimates gathered about
the fire. The room was flushed with subdued, diffused brightness; it
contained the larger things and--almost always--an odour of flowers.
Pansy on this occasion was presumably in the next of the series, the
resort of younger visitors, where tea was served. Osmond stood before
the chimney, leaning back with his hands behind him; he had one foot up
and was warming the sole. Half a dozen persons, scattered near him, were
talking together; but he was not in the conversation; his eyes had an
expression, frequent with them, that seemed to represent them as engaged
with objects more worth their while than the appearances actually
thrust upon them. Rosier, coming in unannounced, failed to attract his
attention; but the young man, who was very punctilious, though he was
even exceptionally conscious that it was the wife, not the husband, he
had come to see, went up to shake hands with him. Osmond put out his
left hand, without changing his attitude.

"How d'ye do? My wife's somewhere about."

"Never fear; I shall find her," said Rosier cheerfully.

Osmond, however, took him in; he had never in his life felt himself so
efficiently looked at. "Madame Merle has told him, and he doesn't like
it," he privately reasoned. He had hoped Madame Merle would be there,
but she was not in sight; perhaps she was in one of the other rooms or
would come later. He had never especially delighted in Gilbert Osmond,
having a fancy he gave himself airs. But Rosier was not quickly
resentful, and where politeness was concerned had ever a strong need of
being quite in the right. He looked round him and smiled, all without
help, and then in a moment, "I saw a jolly good piece of Capo di Monte
to-day," he said.

Osmond answered nothing at first; but presently, while he warmed his
boot-sole, "I don't care a fig for Capo di Monte!" he returned.

"I hope you're not losing your interest?"

"In old pots and plates? Yes, I'm losing my interest."

Rosier for an instant forgot the delicacy of his position. "You're not
thinking of parting with a--a piece or two?"

"No, I'm not thinking of parting with anything at all, Mr. Rosier," said
Osmond, with his eyes still on the eyes of his visitor.

"Ah, you want to keep, but not to add," Rosier remarked brightly.

"Exactly. I've nothing I wish to match."

Poor Rosier was aware he had blushed; he was distressed at his want of
assurance. "Ah, well, I have!" was all he could murmur; and he knew
his murmur was partly lost as he turned away. He took his course to the
adjoining room and met Mrs. Osmond coming out of the deep doorway. She
was dressed in black velvet; she looked high and splendid, as he had
said, and yet oh so radiantly gentle! We know what Mr. Rosier thought
of her and the terms in which, to Madame Merle, he had expressed his
admiration. Like his appreciation of her dear little stepdaughter it
was based partly on his eye for decorative character, his instinct for
authenticity; but also on a sense for uncatalogued values, for that
secret of a "lustre" beyond any recorded losing or rediscovering,
which his devotion to brittle wares had still not disqualified him
to recognise. Mrs. Osmond, at present, might well have gratified such
tastes. The years had touched her only to enrich her; the flower of her
youth had not faded, it only hung more quietly on its stem. She had lost
something of that quick eagerness to which her husband had privately
taken exception--she had more the air of being able to wait. Now, at all
events, framed in the gilded doorway, she struck our young man as the
picture of a gracious lady. "You see I'm very regular," he said. "But
who should be if I'm not?"

"Yes, I've known you longer than any one here. But we mustn't indulge in
tender reminiscences. I want to introduce you to a young lady."

"Ah, please, what young lady?" Rosier was immensely obliging; but this
was not what he had come for.

"She sits there by the fire in pink and has no one to speak to." Rosier
hesitated a moment. "Can't Mr. Osmond speak to her? He's within six feet
of her."

Mrs. Osmond also hesitated. "She's not very lively, and he doesn't like
dull people."

"But she's good enough for me? Ah now, that's hard!"

"I only mean that you've ideas for two. And then you're so obliging."

"No, he's not--to me." And Mrs. Osmond vaguely smiled.

"That's a sign he should be doubly so to other women.

"So I tell him," she said, still smiling.

"You see I want some tea," Rosier went on, looking wistfully beyond.

"That's perfect. Go and give some to my young lady."

"Very good; but after that I'll abandon her to her fate. The simple
truth is I'm dying to have a little talk with Miss Osmond."

"Ah," said Isabel, turning away, "I can't help you there!"

Five minutes later, while he handed a tea-cup to the damsel in pink,
whom he had conducted into the other room, he wondered whether, in
making to Mrs. Osmond the profession I have just quoted, he had broken
the spirit of his promise to Madame Merle. Such a question was capable
of occupying this young man's mind for a considerable time. At last,
however, he became--comparatively speaking--reckless; he cared little
what promises he might break. The fate to which he had threatened to
abandon the damsel in pink proved to be none so terrible; for Pansy
Osmond, who had given him the tea for his companion--Pansy was as fond
as ever of making tea--presently came and talked to her. Into this mild
colloquy Edward Rosier entered little; he sat by moodily, watching his
small sweetheart. If we look at her now through his eyes we shall at
first not see much to remind us of the obedient little girl who, at
Florence, three years before, was sent to walk short distances in the
Cascine while her father and Miss Archer talked together of matters
sacred to elder people. But after a moment we shall perceive that if at
nineteen Pansy has become a young lady she doesn't really fill out the
part; that if she has grown very pretty she lacks in a deplorable degree
the quality known and esteemed in the appearance of females as style;
and that if she is dressed with great freshness she wears her smart
attire with an undisguised appearance of saving it--very much as if it
were lent her for the occasion. Edward Rosier, it would seem, would have
been just the man to note these defects; and in point of fact there was
not a quality of this young lady, of any sort, that he had not noted.
Only he called her qualities by names of his own--some of which indeed
were happy enough. "No, she's unique--she's absolutely unique," he used
to say to himself; and you may be sure that not for an instant would he
have admitted to you that she was wanting in style. Style? Why, she had
the style of a little princess; if you couldn't see it you had no eye.
It was not modern, it was not conscious, it would produce no impression
in Broadway; the small, serious damsel, in her stiff little dress, only
looked like an Infanta of Velasquez. This was enough for Edward Rosier,
who thought her delightfully old-fashioned. Her anxious eyes, her
charming lips, her slip of a figure, were as touching as a childish
prayer. He had now an acute desire to know just to what point she liked
him--a desire which made him fidget as he sat in his chair. It made him
feel hot, so that he had to pat his forehead with his handkerchief; he
had never been so uncomfortable. She was such a perfect jeune fille, and
one couldn't make of a jeune fille the enquiry requisite for throwing
light on such a point. A jeune fille was what Rosier had always dreamed
of--a jeune fille who should yet not be French, for he had felt that
this nationality would complicate the question. He was sure Pansy had
never looked at a newspaper and that, in the way of novels, if she
had read Sir Walter Scott it was the very most. An American jeune
fille--what could be better than that? She would be frank and gay, and
yet would not have walked alone, nor have received letters from men,
nor have been taken to the theatre to see the comedy of manners. Rosier
could not deny that, as the matter stood, it would be a breach of
hospitality to appeal directly to this unsophisticated creature; but
he was now in imminent danger of asking himself if hospitality were
the most sacred thing in the world. Was not the sentiment that he
entertained for Miss Osmond of infinitely greater importance? Of greater
importance to him--yes; but not probably to the master of the house.
There was one comfort; even if this gentleman had been placed on his
guard by Madame Merle he would not have extended the warning to Pansy;
it would not have been part of his policy to let her know that a
prepossessing young man was in love with her. But he WAS in love
with her, the prepossessing young man; and all these restrictions of
circumstance had ended by irritating him. What had Gilbert Osmond meant
by giving him two fingers of his left hand? If Osmond was rude, surely
he himself might be bold. He felt extremely bold after the dull girl
in so vain a disguise of rose-colour had responded to the call of her
mother, who came in to say, with a significant simper at Rosier, that
she must carry her off to other triumphs. The mother and daughter
departed together, and now it depended only upon him that he should be
virtually alone with Pansy. He had never been alone with her before;
he had never been alone with a jeune fille. It was a great moment; poor
Rosier began to pat his forehead again. There was another room beyond
the one in which they stood--a small room that had been thrown open and
lighted, but that, the company not being numerous, had remained empty
all the evening. It was empty yet; it was upholstered in pale yellow;
there were several lamps; through the open door it looked the very
temple of authorised love. Rosier gazed a moment through this aperture;
he was afraid that Pansy would run away, and felt almost capable of
stretching out a hand to detain her. But she lingered where the other
maiden had left them, making no motion to join a knot of visitors on
the far side of the room. For a little it occurred to him that she was
frightened--too frightened perhaps to move; but a second glance assured
him she was not, and he then reflected that she was too innocent indeed
for that. After a supreme hesitation he asked her if he might go and
look at the yellow room, which seemed so attractive yet so virginal. He
had been there already with Osmond, to inspect the furniture, which was
of the First French Empire, and especially to admire the clock (which he
didn't really admire), an immense classic structure of that period. He
therefore felt that he had now begun to manoeuvre.

"Certainly, you may go," said Pansy; "and if you like I'll show you."
She was not in the least frightened.

"That's just what I hoped you'd say; you're so very kind," Rosier
murmured.

They went in together; Rosier really thought the room very ugly, and it
seemed cold. The same idea appeared to have struck Pansy. "It's not for
winter evenings; it's more for summer," she said. "It's papa's taste; he
has so much."

He had a good deal, Rosier thought; but some of it was very bad. He
looked about him; he hardly knew what to say in such a situation.
"Doesn't Mrs. Osmond care how her rooms are done? Has she no taste?" he
asked.

"Oh yes, a great deal; but it's more for literature," said Pansy--"and
for conversation. But papa cares also for those things. I think he knows
everything."

Rosier was silent a little. "There's one thing I'm sure he knows!" he
broke out presently. "He knows that when I come here it's, with all
respect to him, with all respect to Mrs. Osmond, who's so charming--it's
really," said the young man, "to see you!"

"To see me?" And Pansy raised her vaguely troubled eyes.

"To see you; that's what I come for," Rosier repeated, feeling the
intoxication of a rupture with authority.

Pansy stood looking at him, simply, intently, openly; a blush was not
needed to make her face more modest. "I thought it was for that."

"And it was not disagreeable to you?"

"I couldn't tell; I didn't know. You never told me," said Pansy.

"I was afraid of offending you."

"You don't offend me," the young girl murmured, smiling as if an angel
had kissed her.

"You like me then, Pansy?" Rosier asked very gently, feeling very happy.

"Yes--I like you."

They had walked to the chimney-piece where the big cold Empire clock
was perched; they were well within the room and beyond observation from
without. The tone in which she had said these four words seemed to him
the very breath of nature, and his only answer could be to take her
hand and hold it a moment. Then he raised it to his lips. She submitted,
still with her pure, trusting smile, in which there was something
ineffably passive. She liked him--she had liked him all the while; now
anything might happen! She was ready--she had been ready always, waiting
for him to speak. If he had not spoken she would have waited for ever;
but when the word came she dropped like the peach from the shaken tree.
Rosier felt that if he should draw her toward him and hold her to his
heart she would submit without a murmur, would rest there without a
question. It was true that this would be a rash experiment in a yellow
Empire salottino. She had known it was for her he came, and yet like
what a perfect little lady she had carried it off!

"You're very dear to me," he murmured, trying to believe that there was
after all such a thing as hospitality.

She looked a moment at her hand, where he had kissed it. "Did you say
papa knows?"

"You told me just now he knows everything."

"I think you must make sure," said Pansy.

"Ah, my dear, when once I'm sure of YOU!" Rosier murmured in her ear;
whereupon she turned back to the other rooms with a little air of
consistency which seemed to imply that their appeal should be immediate.

The other rooms meanwhile had become conscious of the arrival of Madame
Merle, who, wherever she went, produced an impression when she entered.
How she did it the most attentive spectator could not have told you, for
she neither spoke loud, nor laughed profusely, nor moved rapidly, nor
dressed with splendour, nor appealed in any appreciable manner to the
audience. Large, fair, smiling, serene, there was something in her very
tranquillity that diffused itself, and when people looked round it was
because of a sudden quiet. On this occasion she had done the quietest
thing she could do; after embracing Mrs. Osmond, which was more
striking, she had sat down on a small sofa to commune with the master
of the house. There was a brief exchange of commonplaces between these
two--they always paid, in public, a certain formal tribute to the
commonplace--and then Madame Merle, whose eyes had been wandering, asked
if little Mr. Rosier had come this evening.

"He came nearly an hour ago--but he has disappeared," Osmond said.

"And where's Pansy?"

"In the other room. There are several people there."

"He's probably among them," said Madame Merle.

"Do you wish to see him?" Osmond asked in a provokingly pointless tone.

Madame Merle looked at him a moment; she knew each of his tones to the
eighth of a note. "Yes, I should like to say to him that I've told you
what he wants, and that it interests you but feebly."

"Don't tell him that. He'll try to interest me more--which is exactly
what I don't want. Tell him I hate his proposal."

"But you don't hate it."

"It doesn't signify; I don't love it. I let him see that, myself, this
evening; I was rude to him on purpose. That sort of thing's a great
bore. There's no hurry."

"I'll tell him that you'll take time and think it over."

"No, don't do that. He'll hang on."

"If I discourage him he'll do the same."

"Yes, but in the one case he'll try to talk and explain--which would be
exceedingly tiresome. In the other he'll probably hold his tongue and go
in for some deeper game. That will leave me quiet. I hate talking with a
donkey."

"Is that what you call poor Mr. Rosier?"

"Oh, he's a nuisance--with his eternal majolica."

Madame Merle dropped her eyes; she had a faint smile. "He's a gentleman,
he has a charming temper; and, after all, an income of forty thousand
francs!"

"It's misery--'genteel' misery," Osmond broke in. "It's not what I've
dreamed of for Pansy."

"Very good then. He has promised me not to speak to her."

"Do you believe him?" Osmond asked absentmindedly.

"Perfectly. Pansy has thought a great deal about him; but I don't
suppose you consider that that matters."

"I don't consider it matters at all; but neither do I believe she has
thought of him."

"That opinion's more convenient," said Madame Merle quietly.

"Has she told you she's in love with him?"

"For what do you take her? And for what do you take me?" Madame Merle
added in a moment.

Osmond had raised his foot and was resting his slim ankle on the other
knee; he clasped his ankle in his hand familiarly--his long, fine
forefinger and thumb could make a ring for it--and gazed a while
before him. "This kind of thing doesn't find me unprepared. It's what I
educated her for. It was all for this--that when such a case should come
up she should do what I prefer."

"I'm not afraid that she'll not do it."

"Well then, where's the hitch?"

"I don't see any. But, all the same, I recommend you not to get rid of
Mr. Rosier. Keep him on hand; he may be useful."

"I can't keep him. Keep him yourself."

"Very good; I'll put him into a corner and allow him so much a day."
Madame Merle had, for the most part, while they talked, been glancing
about her; it was her habit in this situation, just as it was her habit
to interpose a good many blank-looking pauses. A long drop followed the
last words I have quoted; and before it had ended she saw Pansy come out
of the adjoining room, followed by Edward Rosier. The girl advanced a
few steps and then stopped and stood looking at Madame Merle and at her
father.

"He has spoken to her," Madame Merle went on to Osmond.

Her companion never turned his head. "So much for your belief in his
promises. He ought to be horsewhipped."

"He intends to confess, poor little man!"

Osmond got up; he had now taken a sharp look at his daughter. "It
doesn't matter," he murmured, turning away.

Pansy after a moment came up to Madame Merle with her little manner
of unfamiliar politeness. This lady's reception of her was not more
intimate; she simply, as she rose from the sofa, gave her a friendly
smile.

"You're very late," the young creature gently said.

"My dear child, I'm never later than I intend to be."

Madame Merle had not got up to be gracious to Pansy; she moved toward
Edward Rosier. He came to meet her and, very quickly, as if to get it
off his mind, "I've spoken to her!" he whispered.

"I know it, Mr. Rosier."

"Did she tell you?"

"Yes, she told me. Behave properly for the rest of the evening, and come
and see me to-morrow at a quarter past five." She was severe, and in
the manner in which she turned her back to him there was a degree of
contempt which caused him to mutter a decent imprecation.

He had no intention of speaking to Osmond; it was neither the time nor
the place. But he instinctively wandered toward Isabel, who sat talking
with an old lady. He sat down on the other side of her; the old lady
was Italian, and Rosier took for granted she understood no English. "You
said just now you wouldn't help me," he began to Mrs. Osmond. "Perhaps
you'll feel differently when you know--when you know--!"

Isabel met his hesitation. "When I know what?"

"That she's all right."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Well, that we've come to an understanding."

"She's all wrong," said Isabel. "It won't do."

Poor Rosier gazed at her half-pleadingly, half-angrily; a sudden flush
testified to his sense of injury. "I've never been treated so," he said.
"What is there against me, after all? That's not the way I'm usually
considered. I could have married twenty times."

"It's a pity you didn't. I don't mean twenty times, but once,
comfortably," Isabel added, smiling kindly. "You're not rich enough for
Pansy."

"She doesn't care a straw for one's money."

"No, but her father does."

"Ah yes, he has proved that!" cried the young man.

Isabel got up, turning away from him, leaving her old lady without
ceremony; and he occupied himself for the next ten minutes in pretending
to look at Gilbert Osmond's collection of miniatures, which were neatly
arranged on a series of small velvet screens. But he looked without
seeing; his cheek burned; he was too full of his sense of injury. It was
certain that he had never been treated that way before; he was not used
to being thought not good enough. He knew how good he was, and if such
a fallacy had not been so pernicious he could have laughed at it. He
searched again for Pansy, but she had disappeared, and his main desire
was now to get out of the house. Before doing so he spoke once more to
Isabel; it was not agreeable to him to reflect that he had just said a
rude thing to her--the only point that would now justify a low view of
him.

"I referred to Mr. Osmond as I shouldn't have done, a while ago," he
began. "But you must remember my situation."

"I don't remember what you said," she answered coldly.

"Ah, you're offended, and now you'll never help me."

She was silent an instant, and then with a change of tone: "It's not
that I won't; I simply can't!" Her manner was almost passionate.

"If you COULD, just a little, I'd never again speak of your husband save
as an angel."

"The inducement's great," said Isabel gravely--inscrutably, as he
afterwards, to himself, called it; and she gave him, straight in the
eyes, a look which was also inscrutable. It made him remember somehow
that he had known her as a child; and yet it was keener than he liked,
and he took himself off.



He went to see Madame Merle on the morrow, and to his surprise she let
him off rather easily. But she made him promise that he would stop
there till something should have been decided. Mr. Osmond had had higher
expectations; it was very true that as he had no intention of giving his
daughter a portion such expectations were open to criticism or even, if
one would, to ridicule. But she would advise Mr. Rosier not to take that
tone; if he would possess his soul in patience he might arrive at his
felicity. Mr. Osmond was not favourable to his suit, but it wouldn't be
a miracle if he should gradually come round. Pansy would never defy
her father, he might depend on that; so nothing was to be gained by
precipitation. Mr. Osmond needed to accustom his mind to an offer of a
sort that he had not hitherto entertained, and this result must come of
itself--it was useless to try to force it. Rosier remarked that his own
situation would be in the meanwhile the most uncomfortable in the world,
and Madame Merle assured him that she felt for him. But, as she justly
declared, one couldn't have everything one wanted; she had learned that
lesson for herself. There would be no use in his writing to Gilbert
Osmond, who had charged her to tell him as much. He wished the matter
dropped for a few weeks and would himself write when he should have
anything to communicate that it might please Mr. Rosier to hear.

"He doesn't like your having spoken to Pansy, Ah, he doesn't like it at
all," said Madame Merle.

"I'm perfectly willing to give him a chance to tell me so!"

"If you do that he'll tell you more than you care to hear. Go to the
house, for the next month, as little as possible, and leave the rest to
me."

"As little as possible? Who's to measure the possibility?"

"Let me measure it. Go on Thursday evenings with the rest of the world,
but don't go at all at odd times, and don't fret about Pansy. I'll see
that she understands everything. She's a calm little nature; she'll take
it quietly."

Edward Rosier fretted about Pansy a good deal, but he did as he was
advised, and awaited another Thursday evening before returning to
Palazzo Roccanera. There had been a party at dinner, so that though he
went early the company was already tolerably numerous. Osmond, as usual,
was in the first room, near the fire, staring straight at the door, so
that, not to be distinctly uncivil, Rosier had to go and speak to him.

"I'm glad that you can take a hint," Pansy's father said, slightly
closing his keen, conscious eyes.

"I take no hints. But I took a message, as I supposed it to be."

"You took it? Where did you take it?"

It seemed to poor Rosier he was being insulted, and he waited a moment,
asking himself how much a true lover ought to submit to. "Madame Merle
gave me, as I understood it, a message from you--to the effect that you
declined to give me the opportunity I desire, the opportunity to explain
my wishes to you." And he flattered himself he spoke rather sternly.

"I don't see what Madame Merle has to do with it. Why did you apply to
Madame Merle?"

"I asked her for an opinion--for nothing more. I did so because she had
seemed to me to know you very well."

"She doesn't know me so well as she thinks," said Osmond.

"I'm sorry for that, because she has given me some little ground for
hope."

Osmond stared into the fire a moment. "I set a great price on my
daughter."

"You can't set a higher one than I do. Don't I prove it by wishing to
marry her?"

"I wish to marry her very well," Osmond went on with a dry impertinence
which, in another mood, poor Rosier would have admired.

"Of course I pretend she'd marry well in marrying me. She couldn't
marry a man who loves her more--or whom, I may venture to add, she loves
more."

"I'm not bound to accept your theories as to whom my daughter
loves"--and Osmond looked up with a quick, cold smile.

"I'm not theorising. Your daughter has spoken."

"Not to me," Osmond continued, now bending forward a little and dropping
his eyes to his boot-toes.

"I have her promise, sir!" cried Rosier with the sharpness of
exasperation.

As their voices had been pitched very low before, such a note attracted
some attention from the company. Osmond waited till this little movement
had subsided; then he said, all undisturbed: "I think she has no
recollection of having given it."

They had been standing with their faces to the fire, and after he had
uttered these last words the master of the house turned round again
to the room. Before Rosier had time to reply he perceived that a
gentleman--a stranger--had just come in, unannounced, according to the
Roman custom, and was about to present himself to his host. The latter
smiled blandly, but somewhat blankly; the visitor had a handsome face
and a large, fair beard, and was evidently an Englishman.

"You apparently don't recognise me," he said with a smile that expressed
more than Osmond's.

"Ah yes, now I do. I expected so little to see you."

Rosier departed and went in direct pursuit of Pansy. He sought her, as
usual, in the neighbouring room, but he again encountered Mrs. Osmond
in his path. He gave his hostess no greeting--he was too righteously
indignant, but said to her crudely: "Your husband's awfully
cold-blooded."

She gave the same mystical smile he had noticed before. "You can't
expect every one to be as hot as yourself."

"I don't pretend to be cold, but I'm cool. What has he been doing to his
daughter?"

"I've no idea."

"Don't you take any interest?" Rosier demanded with his sense that she
too was irritating.

For a moment she answered nothing; then, "No!" she said abruptly and
with a quickened light in her eyes which directly contradicted the word.

"Pardon me if I don't believe that. Where's Miss Osmond?"

"In the corner, making tea. Please leave her there."

Rosier instantly discovered his friend, who had been hidden by
intervening groups. He watched her, but her own attention was entirely
given to her occupation. "What on earth has he done to her?" he asked
again imploringly. "He declares to me she has given me up."

"She has not given you up," Isabel said in a low tone and without
looking at him.

"Ah, thank you for that! Now I'll leave her alone as long as you think
proper!"

He had hardly spoken when he saw her change colour, and became aware
that Osmond was coming toward her accompanied by the gentleman who had
just entered. He judged the latter, in spite of the advantage of good
looks and evident social experience, a little embarrassed. "Isabel,"
said her husband, "I bring you an old friend."

Mrs. Osmond's face, though it wore a smile, was, like her old friend's,
not perfectly confident. "I'm very happy to see Lord Warburton," she
said. Rosier turned away and, now that his talk with her had been
interrupted, felt absolved from the little pledge he had just taken. He
had a quick impression that Mrs. Osmond wouldn't notice what he did.

Isabel in fact, to do him justice, for some time quite ceased to observe
him. She had been startled; she hardly knew if she felt a pleasure or
a pain. Lord Warburton, however, now that he was face to face with her,
was plainly quite sure of his own sense of the matter; though his grey
eyes had still their fine original property of keeping recognition and
attestation strictly sincere. He was "heavier" than of yore and looked
older; he stood there very solidly and sensibly.

"I suppose you didn't expect to see me," he said; "I've but just
arrived. Literally, I only got here this evening. You see I've lost
no time in coming to pay you my respects. I knew you were at home on
Thursdays."

"You see the fame of your Thursdays has spread to England," Osmond
remarked to his wife.

"It's very kind of Lord Warburton to come so soon; we're greatly
flattered," Isabel said.

"Ah well, it's better than stopping in one of those horrible inns,"
Osmond went on.

"The hotel seems very good; I think it's the same at which I saw you
four years since. You know it was here in Rome that we first met; it's a
long time ago. Do you remember where I bade you good-bye?" his lordship
asked of his hostess. "It was in the Capitol, in the first room."

"I remember that myself," said Osmond. "I was there at the time."

"Yes, I remember you there. I was very sorry to leave Rome--so sorry
that, somehow or other, it became almost a dismal memory, and I've never
cared to come back till to-day. But I knew you were living here," her
old friend went on to Isabel, "and I assure you I've often thought of
you. It must be a charming place to live in," he added with a look,
round him, at her established home, in which she might have caught the
dim ghost of his old ruefulness.

"We should have been glad to see you at any time," Osmond observed with
propriety.

"Thank you very much. I haven't been out of England since then. Till a
month ago I really supposed my travels over."

"I've heard of you from time to time," said Isabel, who had already,
with her rare capacity for such inward feats, taken the measure of what
meeting him again meant for her.

"I hope you've heard no harm. My life has been a remarkably complete
blank."

"Like the good reigns in history," Osmond suggested. He appeared to
think his duties as a host now terminated--he had performed them so
conscientiously. Nothing could have been more adequate, more
nicely measured, than his courtesy to his wife's old friend. It
was punctilious, it was explicit, it was everything but natural--a
deficiency which Lord Warburton, who, himself, had on the whole a good
deal of nature, may be supposed to have perceived. "I'll leave you and
Mrs. Osmond together," he added. "You have reminiscences into which I
don't enter."

"I'm afraid you lose a good deal!" Lord Warburton called after him, as
he moved away, in a tone which perhaps betrayed overmuch an appreciation
of his generosity. Then the visitor turned on Isabel the deeper, the
deepest, consciousness of his look, which gradually became more serious.
"I'm really very glad to see you."

"It's very pleasant. You're very kind."

"Do you know that you're changed--a little?"

She just hesitated. "Yes--a good deal."

"I don't mean for the worse, of course; and yet how can I say for the
better?"

"I think I shall have no scruple in saying that to YOU," she bravely
returned.

"Ah well, for me--it's a long time. It would be a pity there shouldn't
be something to show for it." They sat down and she asked him about
his sisters, with other enquiries of a somewhat perfunctory kind. He
answered her questions as if they interested him, and in a few moments
she saw--or believed she saw--that he would press with less of his
whole weight than of yore. Time had breathed upon his heart and, without
chilling it, given it a relieved sense of having taken the air. Isabel
felt her usual esteem for Time rise at a bound. Her friend's manner was
certainly that of a contented man, one who would rather like people, or
like her at least, to know him for such. "There's something I must tell
you without more delay," he resumed. "I've brought Ralph Touchett with
me."

"Brought him with you?" Isabel's surprise was great.

"He's at the hotel; he was too tired to come out and has gone to bed."

"I'll go to see him," she immediately said.

"That's exactly what I hoped you'd do. I had an idea you hadn't seen
much of him since your marriage, that in fact your relations were a--a
little more formal. That's why I hesitated--like an awkward Briton."

"I'm as fond of Ralph as ever," Isabel answered. "But why has he come to
Rome?" The declaration was very gentle, the question a little sharp.

"Because he's very far gone, Mrs. Osmond."

"Rome then is no place for him. I heard from him that he had determined
to give up his custom of wintering abroad and to remain in England,
indoors, in what he called an artificial climate."

"Poor fellow, he doesn't succeed with the artificial! I went to see him
three weeks ago, at Gardencourt, and found him thoroughly ill. He has
been getting worse every year, and now he has no strength left. He
smokes no more cigarettes! He had got up an artificial climate indeed;
the house was as hot as Calcutta. Nevertheless he had suddenly taken it
into his head to start for Sicily. I didn't believe in it--neither did
the doctors, nor any of his friends. His mother, as I suppose you know,
is in America, so there was no one to prevent him. He stuck to his idea
that it would be the saving of him to spend the winter at Catania.
He said he could take servants and furniture, could make himself
comfortable, but in point of fact he hasn't brought anything. I wanted
him at least to go by sea, to save fatigue; but he said he hated the sea
and wished to stop at Rome. After that, though I thought it all rubbish,
I made up my mind to come with him. I'm acting as--what do you call it
in America?--as a kind of moderator. Poor Ralph's very moderate now. We
left England a fortnight ago, and he has been very bad on the way. He
can't keep warm, and the further south we come the more he feels the
cold. He has got rather a good man, but I'm afraid he's beyond human
help. I wanted him to take with him some clever fellow--I mean some
sharp young doctor; but he wouldn't hear of it. If you don't mind my
saying so, I think it was a most extraordinary time for Mrs. Touchett to
decide on going to America."

Isabel had listened eagerly; her face was full of pain and wonder. "My
aunt does that at fixed periods and lets nothing turn her aside. When
the date comes round she starts; I think she'd have started if Ralph had
been dying."

"I sometimes think he IS dying," Lord Warburton said.

Isabel sprang up. "I'll go to him then now."

He checked her; he was a little disconcerted at the quick effect of his
words. "I don't mean I thought so to-night. On the contrary, to-day,
in the train, he seemed particularly well; the idea of our reaching
Rome--he's very fond of Rome, you know--gave him strength. An hour ago,
when I bade him goodnight, he told me he was very tired, but very happy.
Go to him in the morning; that's all I mean. I didn't tell him I was
coming here; I didn't decide to till after we had separated. Then I
remembered he had told me you had an evening, and that it was this very
Thursday. It occurred to me to come in and tell you he's here, and let
you know you had perhaps better not wait for him to call. I think he
said he hadn't written to you." There was no need of Isabel's declaring
that she would act upon Lord Warburton's information; she looked, as she
sat there, like a winged creature held back. "Let alone that I wanted to
see you for myself," her visitor gallantly added.

"I don't understand Ralph's plan; it seems to me very wild," she said.
"I was glad to think of him between those thick walls at Gardencourt."

"He was completely alone there; the thick walls were his only company."

"You went to see him; you've been extremely kind."

"Oh dear, I had nothing to do," said Lord Warburton.

"We hear, on the contrary, that you're doing great things. Every one
speaks of you as a great statesman, and I'm perpetually seeing your name
in the Times, which, by the way, doesn't appear to hold it in reverence.
You're apparently as wild a radical as ever."

"I don't feel nearly so wild; you know the world has come round to me.
Touchett and I have kept up a sort of parliamentary debate all the way
from London. I tell him he's the last of the Tories, and he calls me
the King of the Goths--says I have, down to the details of my personal
appearance, every sign of the brute. So you see there's life in him
yet."

Isabel had many questions to ask about Ralph, but she abstained from
asking them all. She would see for herself on the morrow. She perceived
that after a little Lord Warburton would tire of that subject--he had a
conception of other possible topics. She was more and more able to say
to herself that he had recovered, and, what is more to the point, she
was able to say it without bitterness. He had been for her, of old,
such an image of urgency, of insistence, of something to be resisted
and reasoned with, that his reappearance at first menaced her with a new
trouble. But she was now reassured; she could see he only wished to live
with her on good terms, that she was to understand he had forgiven her
and was incapable of the bad taste of making pointed allusions. This was
not a form of revenge, of course; she had no suspicion of his wishing to
punish her by an exhibition of disillusionment; she did him the justice
to believe it had simply occurred to him that she would now take a
good-natured interest in knowing he was resigned. It was the resignation
of a healthy, manly nature, in which sentimental wounds could never
fester. British politics had cured him; she had known they would. She
gave an envious thought to the happier lot of men, who are always free
to plunge into the healing waters of action. Lord Warburton of course
spoke of the past, but he spoke of it without implications; he even
went so far as to allude to their former meeting in Rome as a very jolly
time. And he told her he had been immensely interested in hearing of her
marriage and that it was a great pleasure for him to make Mr. Osmond's
acquaintance--since he could hardly be said to have made it on the other
occasion. He had not written to her at the time of that passage in her
history, but he didn't apologise to her for this. The only thing he
implied was that they were old friends, intimate friends. It was very
much as an intimate friend that he said to her, suddenly, after a short
pause which he had occupied in smiling, as he looked about him, like a
person amused, at a provincial entertainment, by some innocent game of
guesses--

"Well now, I suppose you're very happy and all that sort of thing?"

Isabel answered with a quick laugh; the tone of his remark struck her
almost as the accent of comedy. "Do you suppose if I were not I'd tell
you?"

"Well, I don't know. I don't see why not."

"I do then. Fortunately, however, I'm very happy."

"You've got an awfully good house."

"Yes, it's very pleasant. But that's not my merit--it's my husband's."

"You mean he has arranged it?"

"Yes, it was nothing when we came."

"He must be very clever."

"He has a genius for upholstery," said Isabel.

"There's a great rage for that sort of thing now. But you must have a
taste of your own."

"I enjoy things when they're done, but I've no ideas. I can never
propose anything."

"Do you mean you accept what others propose?"

"Very willingly, for the most part."

"That's a good thing to know. I shall propose to you something."

"It will be very kind. I must say, however, that I've in a few small
ways a certain initiative. I should like for instance to introduce you
to some of these people."

"Oh, please don't; I prefer sitting here. Unless it be to that young
lady in the blue dress. She has a charming face."

"The one talking to the rosy young man? That's my husband's daughter."

"Lucky man, your husband. What a dear little maid!"

"You must make her acquaintance."

"In a moment--with pleasure. I like looking at her from here." He ceased
to look at her, however, very soon; his eyes constantly reverted to Mrs.
Osmond. "Do you know I was wrong just now in saying you had changed?" he
presently went on. "You seem to me, after all, very much the same."

"And yet I find it a great change to be married," said Isabel with mild
gaiety.

"It affects most people more than it has affected you. You see I haven't
gone in for that."

"It rather surprises me."

"You ought to understand it, Mrs. Osmond. But I do want to marry," he
added more simply.

"It ought to be very easy," Isabel said, rising--after which she
reflected, with a pang perhaps too visible, that she was hardly the
person to say this. It was perhaps because Lord Warburton divined the
pang that he generously forbore to call her attention to her not having
contributed then to the facility.

Edward Rosier had meanwhile seated himself on an ottoman beside Pansy's
tea-table. He pretended at first to talk to her about trifles, and she
asked him who was the new gentleman conversing with her stepmother.

"He's an English lord," said Rosier. "I don't know more."

"I wonder if he'll have some tea. The English are so fond of tea."

"Never mind that; I've something particular to say to you."

"Don't speak so loud every one will hear," said Pansy.

"They won't hear if you continue to look that way: as if your only
thought in life was the wish the kettle would boil."

"It has just been filled; the servants never know!"--and she sighed with
the weight of her responsibility.

"Do you know what your father said to me just now? That you didn't mean
what you said a week ago."

"I don't mean everything I say. How can a young girl do that? But I mean
what I say to you."

"He told me you had forgotten me."

"Ah no, I don't forget," said Pansy, showing her pretty teeth in a fixed
smile.

"Then everything's just the very same?"

"Ah no, not the very same. Papa has been terribly severe."

"What has he done to you?"

"He asked me what you had done to me, and I told him everything. Then he
forbade me to marry you."

"You needn't mind that."

"Oh yes, I must indeed. I can't disobey papa."

"Not for one who loves you as I do, and whom you pretend to love?"

She raised the lid of the tea-pot, gazing into this vessel for a moment;
then she dropped six words into its aromatic depths. "I love you just as
much."

"What good will that do me?"

"Ah," said Pansy, raising her sweet, vague eyes, "I don't know that."

"You disappoint me," groaned poor Rosier.

She was silent a little; she handed a tea-cup to a servant. "Please
don't talk any more."

"Is this to be all my satisfaction?"

"Papa said I was not to talk with you."

"Do you sacrifice me like that? Ah, it's too much!"

"I wish you'd wait a little," said the girl in a voice just distinct
enough to betray a quaver.

"Of course I'll wait if you'll give me hope. But you take my life away."

"I'll not give you up--oh no!" Pansy went on.

"He'll try and make you marry some one else."

"I'll never do that."

"What then are we to wait for?"

She hesitated again. "I'll speak to Mrs. Osmond and she'll help us." It
was in this manner that she for the most part designated her stepmother.

"She won't help us much. She's afraid."

"Afraid of what?"

"Of your father, I suppose."

Pansy shook her little head. "She's not afraid of any one. We must have
patience."

"Ah, that's an awful word," Rosier groaned; he was deeply disconcerted.
Oblivious of the customs of good society, he dropped his head into his
hands and, supporting it with a melancholy grace, sat staring at the
carpet. Presently he became aware of a good deal of movement about
him and, as he looked up, saw Pansy making a curtsey--it was still her
little curtsey of the convent--to the English lord whom Mrs. Osmond had
introduced.




It will probably not surprise the reflective reader that Ralph Touchett
should have seen less of his cousin since her marriage than he had done
before that event--an event of which he took such a view as could hardly
prove a confirmation of intimacy. He had uttered his thought, as we
know, and after this had held his peace, Isabel not having invited him
to resume a discussion which marked an era in their relations. That
discussion had made a difference--the difference he feared rather than
the one he hoped. It had not chilled the girl's zeal in carrying out her
engagement, but it had come dangerously near to spoiling a friendship.
No reference was ever again made between them to Ralph's opinion of
Gilbert Osmond, and by surrounding this topic with a sacred silence they
managed to preserve a semblance of reciprocal frankness. But there was a
difference, as Ralph often said to himself--there was a difference. She
had not forgiven him, she never would forgive him: that was all he had
gained. She thought she had forgiven him; she believed she didn't care;
and as she was both very generous and very proud these convictions
represented a certain reality. But whether or no the event should
justify him he would virtually have done her a wrong, and the wrong was
of the sort that women remember best. As Osmond's wife she could never
again be his friend. If in this character she should enjoy the felicity
she expected, she would have nothing but contempt for the man who had
attempted, in advance, to undermine a blessing so dear; and if on the
other hand his warning should be justified the vow she had taken that he
should never know it would lay upon her spirit such a burden as to make
her hate him. So dismal had been, during the year that followed
his cousin's marriage, Ralph's prevision of the future; and if his
meditations appear morbid we must remember he was not in the bloom
of health. He consoled himself as he might by behaving (as he deemed)
beautifully, and was present at the ceremony by which Isabel was united
to Mr. Osmond, and which was performed in Florence in the month of
June. He learned from his mother that Isabel at first had thought of
celebrating her nuptials in her native land, but that as simplicity was
what she chiefly desired to secure she had finally decided, in spite
of Osmond's professed willingness to make a journey of any length, that
this characteristic would be best embodied in their being married by the
nearest clergyman in the shortest time. The thing was done therefore at
the little American chapel, on a very hot day, in the presence only of
Mrs. Touchett and her son, of Pansy Osmond and the Countess Gemini. That
severity in the proceedings of which I just spoke was in part the result
of the absence of two persons who might have been looked for on the
occasion and who would have lent it a certain richness. Madame Merle
had been invited, but Madame Merle, who was unable to leave Rome, had
written a gracious letter of excuses. Henrietta Stackpole had not been
invited, as her departure from America, announced to Isabel by Mr.
Goodwood, was in fact frustrated by the duties of her profession; but
she had sent a letter, less gracious than Madame Merle's, intimating
that, had she been able to cross the Atlantic, she would have been
present not only as a witness but as a critic. Her return to Europe had
taken place somewhat later, and she had effected a meeting with Isabel
in the autumn, in Paris, when she had indulged--perhaps a trifle too
freely--her critical genius. Poor Osmond, who was chiefly the subject
of it, had protested so sharply that Henrietta was obliged to declare to
Isabel that she had taken a step which put a barrier between them. "It
isn't in the least that you've married--it is that you have married
HIM," she had deemed it her duty to remark; agreeing, it will be seen,
much more with Ralph Touchett than she suspected, though she had few of
his hesitations and compunctions. Henrietta's second visit to Europe,
however, was not apparently to have been made in vain; for just at the
moment when Osmond had declared to Isabel that he really must object to
that newspaper-woman, and Isabel had answered that it seemed to her he
took Henrietta too hard, the good Mr. Bantling had appeared upon
the scene and proposed that they should take a run down to Spain.
Henrietta's letters from Spain had proved the most acceptable she
had yet published, and there had been one in especial, dated from the
Alhambra and entitled 'Moors and Moonlight,' which generally passed for
her masterpiece. Isabel had been secretly disappointed at her husband's
not seeing his way simply to take the poor girl for funny. She even
wondered if his sense of fun, or of the funny--which would be his sense
of humour, wouldn't it?--were by chance defective. Of course she herself
looked at the matter as a person whose present happiness had nothing
to grudge to Henrietta's violated conscience. Osmond had thought their
alliance a kind of monstrosity; he couldn't imagine what they had in
common. For him, Mr. Bantling's fellow tourist was simply the most
vulgar of women, and he had also pronounced her the most abandoned.
Against this latter clause of the verdict Isabel had appealed with an
ardour that had made him wonder afresh at the oddity of some of his
wife's tastes. Isabel could explain it only by saying that she liked to
know people who were as different as possible from herself. "Why
then don't you make the acquaintance of your washerwoman?" Osmond
had enquired; to which Isabel had answered that she was afraid her
washerwoman wouldn't care for her. Now Henrietta cared so much.

Ralph had seen nothing of her for the greater part of the two years that
had followed her marriage; the winter that formed the beginning of her
residence in Rome he had spent again at San Remo, where he had been
joined in the spring by his mother, who afterwards had gone with him
to England, to see what they were doing at the bank--an operation she
couldn't induce him to perform. Ralph had taken a lease of his house at
San Remo, a small villa which he had occupied still another winter; but
late in the month of April of this second year he had come down to Rome.
It was the first time since her marriage that he had stood face to face
with Isabel; his desire to see her again was then of the keenest. She
had written to him from time to time, but her letters told him nothing
he wanted to know. He had asked his mother what she was making of her
life, and his mother had simply answered that she supposed she was
making the best of it. Mrs. Touchett had not the imagination that
communes with the unseen, and she now pretended to no intimacy with
her niece, whom she rarely encountered. This young woman appeared to
be living in a sufficiently honourable way, but Mrs. Touchett still
remained of the opinion that her marriage had been a shabby affair. It
had given her no pleasure to think of Isabel's establishment, which she
was sure was a very lame business. From time to time, in Florence, she
rubbed against the Countess Gemini, doing her best always to minimise
the contact; and the Countess reminded her of Osmond, who made her
think of Isabel. The Countess was less talked of in these days; but Mrs.
Touchett augured no good of that: it only proved how she had been talked
of before. There was a more direct suggestion of Isabel in the person
of Madame Merle; but Madame Merle's relations with Mrs. Touchett had
undergone a perceptible change. Isabel's aunt had told her, without
circumlocution, that she had played too ingenious a part; and Madame
Merle, who never quarrelled with any one, who appeared to think no one
worth it, and who had performed the miracle of living, more or less,
for several years with Mrs. Touchett and showing no symptom of
irritation--Madame Merle now took a very high tone and declared that
this was an accusation from which she couldn't stoop to defend herself.
She added, however (without stooping), that her behaviour had been only
too simple, that she had believed only what she saw, that she saw Isabel
was not eager to marry and Osmond not eager to please (his repeated
visits had been nothing; he was boring himself to death on his hill-top
and he came merely for amusement). Isabel had kept her sentiments to
herself, and her journey to Greece and Egypt had effectually thrown
dust in her companion's eyes. Madame Merle accepted the event--she was
unprepared to think of it as a scandal; but that she had played any part
in it, double or single, was an imputation against which she proudly
protested. It was doubtless in consequence of Mrs. Touchett's attitude,
and of the injury it offered to habits consecrated by many charming
seasons, that Madame Merle had, after this, chosen to pass many months
in England, where her credit was quite unimpaired. Mrs. Touchett had
done her a wrong; there are some things that can't be forgiven. But
Madame Merle suffered in silence; there was always something exquisite
in her dignity.

Ralph, as I say, had wished to see for himself; but while engaged in
this pursuit he had yet felt afresh what a fool he had been to put the
girl on her guard. He had played the wrong card, and now he had lost the
game. He should see nothing, he should learn nothing; for him she would
always wear a mask. His true line would have been to profess delight in
her union, so that later, when, as Ralph phrased it, the bottom should
fall out of it, she might have the pleasure of saying to him that he
had been a goose. He would gladly have consented to pass for a goose in
order to know Isabel's real situation. At present, however, she neither
taunted him with his fallacies nor pretended that her own confidence was
justified; if she wore a mask it completely covered her face. There was
something fixed and mechanical in the serenity painted on it; this was
not an expression, Ralph said--it was a representation, it was even an
advertisement. She had lost her child; that was a sorrow, but it was a
sorrow she scarcely spoke of; there was more to say about it than she
could say to Ralph. It belonged to the past, moreover; it had occurred
six months before and she had already laid aside the tokens of mourning.
She appeared to be leading the life of the world; Ralph heard her spoken
of as having a "charming position." He observed that she produced the
impression of being peculiarly enviable, that it was supposed, among
many people, to be a privilege even to know her. Her house was not open
to every one, and she had an evening in the week to which people
were not invited as a matter of course. She lived with a certain
magnificence, but you needed to be a member of her circle to perceive
it; for there was nothing to gape at, nothing to criticise, nothing even
to admire, in the daily proceedings of Mr. and Mrs. Osmond. Ralph, in
all this, recognised the hand of the master; for he knew that Isabel had
no faculty for producing studied impressions. She struck him as having
a great love of movement, of gaiety, of late hours, of long rides, of
fatigue; an eagerness to be entertained, to be interested, even to be
bored, to make acquaintances, to see people who were talked about, to
explore the neighbourhood of Rome, to enter into relation with certain
of the mustiest relics of its old society. In all this there was
much less discrimination than in that desire for comprehensiveness of
development on which he had been used to exercise his wit. There was
a kind of violence in some of her impulses, of crudity in some of her
experiments, which took him by surprise: it seemed to him that she even
spoke faster, moved faster, breathed faster, than before her marriage.
Certainly she had fallen into exaggerations--she who used to care so
much for the pure truth; and whereas of old she had a great delight
in good-humoured argument, in intellectual play (she never looked
so charming as when in the genial heat of discussion she received a
crushing blow full in the face and brushed it away as a feather), she
appeared now to think there was nothing worth people's either differing
about or agreeing upon. Of old she had been curious, and now she was
indifferent, and yet in spite of her indifference her activity was
greater than ever. Slender still, but lovelier than before, she had
gained no great maturity of aspect; yet there was an amplitude and a
brilliancy in her personal arrangements that gave a touch of insolence
to her beauty. Poor human-hearted Isabel, what perversity had bitten
her? Her light step drew a mass of drapery behind it; her intelligent
head sustained a majesty of ornament. The free, keen girl had become
quite another person; what he saw was the fine lady who was supposed to
represent something. What did Isabel represent? Ralph asked himself;
and he could only answer by saying that she represented Gilbert Osmond.
"Good heavens, what a function!" he then woefully exclaimed. He was lost
in wonder at the mystery of things.

He recognised Osmond, as I say; he recognised him at every turn. He
saw how he kept all things within limits; how he adjusted, regulated,
animated their manner of life. Osmond was in his element; at last he had
material to work with. He always had an eye to effect, and his effects
were deeply calculated. They were produced by no vulgar means, but the
motive was as vulgar as the art was great. To surround his interior
with a sort of invidious sanctity, to tantalise society with a sense
of exclusion, to make people believe his house was different from every
other, to impart to the face that he presented to the world a cold
originality--this was the ingenious effort of the personage to whom
Isabel had attributed a superior morality. "He works with superior
material," Ralph said to himself; "it's rich abundance compared with his
former resources." Ralph was a clever man; but Ralph had never--to his
own sense--been so clever as when he observed, in petto, that under the
guise of caring only for intrinsic values Osmond lived exclusively for
the world. Far from being its master as he pretended to be, he was
its very humble servant, and the degree of its attention was his only
measure of success. He lived with his eye on it from morning till night,
and the world was so stupid it never suspected the trick. Everything
he did was pose--pose so subtly considered that if one were not on the
lookout one mistook it for impulse. Ralph had never met a man who lived
so much in the land of consideration. His tastes, his studies, his
accomplishments, his collections, were all for a purpose. His life on
his hill-top at Florence had been the conscious attitude of years. His
solitude, his ennui, his love for his daughter, his good manners, his
bad manners, were so many features of a mental image constantly present
to him as a model of impertinence and mystification. His ambition was
not to please the world, but to please himself by exciting the world's
curiosity and then declining to satisfy it. It had made him feel great,
ever, to play the world a trick. The thing he had done in his life most
directly to please himself was his marrying Miss Archer; though in this
case indeed the gullible world was in a manner embodied in poor Isabel,
who had been mystified to the top of her bent. Ralph of course found
a fitness in being consistent; he had embraced a creed, and as he had
suffered for it he could not in honour forsake it. I give this little
sketch of its articles for what they may at the time have been worth.
It was certain that he was very skilful in fitting the facts to his
theory--even the fact that during the month he spent in Rome at this
period the husband of the woman he loved appeared to regard him not in
the least as an enemy.

For Gilbert Osmond Ralph had not now that importance. It was not that he
had the importance of a friend; it was rather that he had none at all.
He was Isabel's cousin and he was rather unpleasantly ill--it was on
this basis that Osmond treated with him. He made the proper enquiries,
asked about his health, about Mrs. Touchett, about his opinion of winter
climates, whether he were comfortable at his hotel. He addressed him, on
the few occasions of their meeting, not a word that was not necessary;
but his manner had always the urbanity proper to conscious success in
the presence of conscious failure. For all this, Ralph had had, toward
the end, a sharp inward vision of Osmond's making it of small ease to
his wife that she should continue to receive Mr. Touchett. He was not
jealous--he had not that excuse; no one could be jealous of Ralph. But
he made Isabel pay for her old-time kindness, of which so much was
still left; and as Ralph had no idea of her paying too much, so when his
suspicion had become sharp, he had taken himself off. In doing so he
had deprived Isabel of a very interesting occupation: she had been
constantly wondering what fine principle was keeping him alive. She had
decided that it was his love of conversation; his conversation had been
better than ever. He had given up walking; he was no longer a humorous
stroller. He sat all day in a chair--almost any chair would serve, and
was so dependent on what you would do for him that, had not his talk
been highly contemplative, you might have thought he was blind. The
reader already knows more about him than Isabel was ever to know, and
the reader may therefore be given the key to the mystery. What kept
Ralph alive was simply the fact that he had not yet seen enough of
the person in the world in whom he was most interested: he was not yet
satisfied. There was more to come; he couldn't make up his mind to lose
that. He wanted to see what she would make of her husband--or what her
husband would make of her. This was only the first act of the drama, and
he was determined to sit out the performance. His determination had held
good; it had kept him going some eighteen months more, till the time of
his return to Rome with Lord Warburton. It had given him indeed such an
air of intending to live indefinitely that Mrs. Touchett, though more
accessible to confusions of thought in the matter of this strange,
unremunerative--and unremunerated--son of hers than she had ever been
before, had, as we have learned, not scrupled to embark for a distant
land. If Ralph had been kept alive by suspense it was with a good deal
of the same emotion--the excitement of wondering in what state she
should find him--that Isabel mounted to his apartment the day after Lord
Warburton had notified her of his arrival in Rome.

She spent an hour with him; it was the first of several visits. Gilbert
Osmond called on him punctually, and on their sending their carriage for
him Ralph came more than once to Palazzo Roccanera. A fortnight elapsed,
at the end of which Ralph announced to Lord Warburton that he thought
after all he wouldn't go to Sicily. The two men had been dining together
after a day spent by the latter in ranging about the Campagna. They had
left the table, and Warburton, before the chimney, was lighting a cigar,
which he instantly removed from his lips.

"Won't go to Sicily? Where then will you go?"

"Well, I guess I won't go anywhere," said Ralph, from the sofa, all
shamelessly.

"Do you mean you'll return to England?"

"Oh dear no; I'll stay in Rome."

"Rome won't do for you. Rome's not warm enough."

"It will have to do. I'll make it do. See how well I've been."

Lord Warburton looked at him a while, puffing a cigar and as if trying
to see it. "You've been better than you were on the journey, certainly.
I wonder how you lived through that. But I don't understand your
condition. I recommend you to try Sicily."

"I can't try," said poor Ralph. "I've done trying. I can't move further.
I can't face that journey. Fancy me between Scylla and Charybdis! I
don't want to die on the Sicilian plains--to be snatched away, like
Proserpine in the same locality, to the Plutonian shades."

"What the deuce then did you come for?" his lordship enquired.

"Because the idea took me. I see it won't do. It really doesn't
matter where I am now. I've exhausted all remedies, I've swallowed
all climates. As I'm here I'll stay. I haven't a single cousin in
Sicily--much less a married one."

"Your cousin's certainly an inducement. But what does the doctor say?"

"I haven't asked him, and I don't care a fig. If I die here Mrs. Osmond
will bury me. But I shall not die here."

"I hope not." Lord Warburton continued to smoke reflectively. "Well,
I must say," he resumed, "for myself I'm very glad you don't insist on
Sicily. I had a horror of that journey."

"Ah, but for you it needn't have mattered. I had no idea of dragging you
in my train."

"I certainly didn't mean to let you go alone."

"My dear Warburton, I never expected you to come further than this,"
Ralph cried.

"I should have gone with you and seen you settled," said Lord Warburton.

"You're a very good Christian. You're a very kind man."

"Then I should have come back here."

"And then you'd have gone to England."

"No, no; I should have stayed."

"Well," said Ralph, "if that's what we are both up to, I don't see where
Sicily comes in!"

His companion was silent; he sat staring at the fire. At last, looking
up, "I say, tell me this," he broke out; "did you really mean to go to
Sicily when we started?"

"Ah, vous m'en demandez trop! Let me put a question first. Did you come
with me quite--platonically?"

"I don't know what you mean by that. I wanted to come abroad."

"I suspect we've each been playing our little game."

"Speak for yourself. I made no secret whatever of my desiring to be here
a while."

"Yes, I remember you said you wished to see the Minister of Foreign
Affairs."

"I've seen him three times. He's very amusing."

"I think you've forgotten what you came for," said Ralph.

"Perhaps I have," his companion answered rather gravely.

These two were gentlemen of a race which is not distinguished by the
absence of reserve, and they had travelled together from London to Rome
without an allusion to matters that were uppermost in the mind of each.
There was an old subject they had once discussed, but it had lost its
recognised place in their attention, and even after their arrival
in Rome, where many things led back to it, they had kept the same
half-diffident, half-confident silence.

"I recommend you to get the doctor's consent, all the same," Lord
Warburton went on, abruptly, after an interval.

"The doctor's consent will spoil it. I never have it when I can help
it."

"What then does Mrs. Osmond think?" Ralph's friend demanded. "I've not
told her. She'll probably say that Rome's too cold and even offer to go
with me to Catania. She's capable of that."

"In your place I should like it."

"Her husband won't like it."

"Ah well, I can fancy that; though it seems to me you're not bound to
mind his likings. They're his affair."

"I don't want to make any more trouble between them," said Ralph.

"Is there so much already?"

"There's complete preparation for it. Her going off with me would make
the explosion. Osmond isn't fond of his wife's cousin."

"Then of course he'd make a row. But won't he make a row if you stop
here?"

"That's what I want to see. He made one the last time I was in Rome, and
then I thought it my duty to disappear. Now I think it's my duty to stop
and defend her."

"My dear Touchett, your defensive powers--!" Lord Warburton began with
a smile. But he saw something in his companion's face that checked him.
"Your duty, in these premises, seems to me rather a nice question," he
observed instead.

Ralph for a short time answered nothing. "It's true that my defensive
powers are small," he returned at last; "but as my aggressive ones are
still smaller Osmond may after all not think me worth his gunpowder. At
any rate," he added, "there are things I'm curious to see."

"You're sacrificing your health to your curiosity then?"

"I'm not much interested in my health, and I'm deeply interested in Mrs.
Osmond."

"So am I. But not as I once was," Lord Warburton added quickly. This was
one of the allusions he had not hitherto found occasion to make.

"Does she strike you as very happy?" Ralph enquired, emboldened by this
confidence.

"Well, I don't know; I've hardly thought. She told me the other night
she was happy."

"Ah, she told YOU, of course," Ralph exclaimed, smiling.

"I don't know that. It seems to me I was rather the sort of person she
might have complained to."

"Complained? She'll never complain. She has done it--what she HAS
done--and she knows it. She'll complain to you least of all. She's very
careful."

"She needn't be. I don't mean to make love to her again."

"I'm delighted to hear it. There can be no doubt at least of YOUR duty."

"Ah no," said Lord Warburton gravely; "none!"

"Permit me to ask," Ralph went on, "whether it's to bring out the fact
that you don't mean to make love to her that you're so very civil to the
little girl?"

Lord Warburton gave a slight start; he got up and stood before the fire,
looking at it hard. "Does that strike you as very ridiculous?"

"Ridiculous? Not in the least, if you really like her."

"I think her a delightful little person. I don't know when a girl of
that age has pleased me more."

"She's a charming creature. Ah, she at least is genuine."

"Of course there's the difference in our ages--more than twenty years."

"My dear Warburton," said Ralph, "are you serious?"

"Perfectly serious--as far as I've got."

"I'm very glad. And, heaven help us," cried Ralph, "how cheered-up old
Osmond will be!"

His companion frowned. "I say, don't spoil it. I shouldn't propose for
his daughter to please HIM."

"He'll have the perversity to be pleased all the same."

"He's not so fond of me as that," said his lordship.

"As that? My dear Warburton, the drawback of your position is that
people needn't be fond of you at all to wish to be connected with you.
Now, with me in such a case, I should have the happy confidence that
they loved me."

Lord Warburton seemed scarcely in the mood for doing justice to general
axioms--he was thinking of a special case. "Do you judge she'll be
pleased?"

"The girl herself? Delighted, surely."

"No, no; I mean Mrs. Osmond."

Ralph looked at him a moment. "My dear fellow, what has she to do with
it?"

"Whatever she chooses. She's very fond of Pansy."

"Very true--very true." And Ralph slowly got up. "It's an interesting
question--how far her fondness for Pansy will carry her." He stood there
a moment with his hands in his pockets and rather a clouded brow. "I
hope, you know, that you're very--very sure. The deuce!" he broke off.
"I don't know how to say it."

"Yes, you do; you know how to say everything."

"Well, it's awkward. I hope you're sure that among Miss Osmond's merits
her being--a--so near her stepmother isn't a leading one?"

"Good heavens, Touchett!" cried Lord Warburton angrily, "for what do you
take me?"



Isabel had not seen much of Madame Merle since her marriage, this lady
having indulged in frequent absences from Rome. At one time she had
spent six months in England; at another she had passed a portion of a
winter in Paris. She had made numerous visits to distant friends and
gave countenance to the idea that for the future she should be a less
inveterate Roman than in the past. As she had been inveterate in the
past only in the sense of constantly having an apartment in one of
the sunniest niches of the Pincian--an apartment which often stood
empty--this suggested a prospect of almost constant absence; a
danger which Isabel at one period had been much inclined to deplore.
Familiarity had modified in some degree her first impression of Madame
Merle, but it had not essentially altered it; there was still much
wonder of admiration in it. That personage was armed at all points; it
was a pleasure to see a character so completely equipped for the social
battle. She carried her flag discreetly, but her weapons were polished
steel, and she used them with a skill which struck Isabel as more
and more that of a veteran. She was never weary, never overcome with
disgust; she never appeared to need rest or consolation. She had her own
ideas; she had of old exposed a great many of them to Isabel, who
knew also that under an appearance of extreme self-control her
highly-cultivated friend concealed a rich sensibility. But her will was
mistress of her life; there was something gallant in the way she kept
going. It was as if she had learned the secret of it--as if the art of
life were some clever trick she had guessed. Isabel, as she herself grew
older, became acquainted with revulsions, with disgusts; there were days
when the world looked black and she asked herself with some sharpness
what it was that she was pretending to live for. Her old habit had
been to live by enthusiasm, to fall in love with suddenly-perceived
possibilities, with the idea of some new adventure. As a younger person
she had been used to proceed from one little exaltation to the other:
there were scarcely any dull places between. But Madame Merle had
suppressed enthusiasm; she fell in love now-a-days with nothing; she
lived entirely by reason and by wisdom. There were hours when Isabel
would have given anything for lessons in this art; if her brilliant
friend had been near she would have made an appeal to her. She had
become aware more than before of the advantage of being like that--of
having made one's self a firm surface, a sort of corselet of silver.

But, as I say, it was not till the winter during which we lately renewed
acquaintance with our heroine that the personage in question made again
a continuous stay in Rome. Isabel now saw more of her than she had done
since her marriage; but by this time Isabel's needs and inclinations
had considerably changed. It was not at present to Madame Merle that she
would have applied for instruction; she had lost the desire to know this
lady's clever trick. If she had troubles she must keep them to herself,
and if life was difficult it would not make it easier to confess herself
beaten. Madame Merle was doubtless of great use to herself and an
ornament to any circle; but was she--would she be--of use to others
in periods of refined embarrassment? The best way to profit by her
friend--this indeed Isabel had always thought--was to imitate her, to be
as firm and bright as she. She recognised no embarrassments, and Isabel,
considering this fact, determined for the fiftieth time to brush aside
her own. It seemed to her too, on the renewal of an intercourse which
had virtually been interrupted, that her old ally was different, was
almost detached--pushing to the extreme a certain rather artificial fear
of being indiscreet. Ralph Touchett, we know, had been of the opinion
that she was prone to exaggeration, to forcing the note--was apt, in the
vulgar phrase, to overdo it. Isabel had never admitted this charge--had
never indeed quite understood it; Madame Merle's conduct, to her
perception, always bore the stamp of good taste, was always "quiet."
But in this matter of not wishing to intrude upon the inner life of the
Osmond family it at last occurred to our young woman that she overdid a
little. That of course was not the best taste; that was rather violent.
She remembered too much that Isabel was married; that she had now other
interests; that though she, Madame Merle, had known Gilbert Osmond and
his little Pansy very well, better almost than any one, she was not
after all of the inner circle. She was on her guard; she never spoke of
their affairs till she was asked, even pressed--as when her opinion was
wanted; she had a dread of seeming to meddle. Madame Merle was as candid
as we know, and one day she candidly expressed this dread to Isabel.

"I MUST be on my guard," she said; "I might so easily, without
suspecting it, offend you. You would be right to be offended, even if my
intention should have been of the purest. I must not forget that I knew
your husband long before you did; I must not let that betray me. If you
were a silly woman you might be jealous. You're not a silly woman; I
know that perfectly. But neither am I; therefore I'm determined not
to get into trouble. A little harm's very soon done; a mistake's made
before one knows it. Of course if I had wished to make love to your
husband I had ten years to do it in, and nothing to prevent; so it isn't
likely I shall begin to-day, when I'm so much less attractive than I
was. But if I were to annoy you by seeming to take a place that doesn't
belong to me, you wouldn't make that reflection; you'd simply say I
was forgetting certain differences. I'm determined not to forget them.
Certainly a good friend isn't always thinking of that; one doesn't
suspect one's friends of injustice. I don't suspect you, my dear, in
the least; but I suspect human nature. Don't think I make myself
uncomfortable; I'm not always watching myself. I think I sufficiently
prove it in talking to you as I do now. All I wish to say is, however,
that if you were to be jealous--that's the form it would take--I should
be sure to think it was a little my fault. It certainly wouldn't be your
husband's."

Isabel had had three years to think over Mrs. Touchett's theory that
Madame Merle had made Gilbert Osmond's marriage. We know how she had
at first received it. Madame Merle might have made Gilbert Osmond's
marriage, but she certainly had not made Isabel Archer's. That was the
work of--Isabel scarcely knew what: of nature, providence, fortune, of
the eternal mystery of things. It was true her aunt's complaint had
been not so much of Madame Merle's activity as of her duplicity: she had
brought about the strange event and then she had denied her guilt. Such
guilt would not have been great, to Isabel's mind; she couldn't make
a crime of Madame Merle's having been the producing cause of the most
important friendship she had ever formed. This had occurred to her just
before her marriage, after her little discussion with her aunt and at a
time when she was still capable of that large inward reference, the
tone almost of the philosophic historian, to her scant young annals. If
Madame Merle had desired her change of state she could only say it had
been a very happy thought. With her, moreover, she had been perfectly
straightforward; she had never concealed her high opinion of Gilbert
Osmond. After their union Isabel discovered that her husband took a less
convenient view of the matter; he seldom consented to finger, in talk,
this roundest and smoothest bead of their social rosary. "Don't you like
Madame Merle?" Isabel had once said to him. "She thinks a great deal of
you."

"I'll tell you once for all," Osmond had answered. "I liked her once
better than I do to-day. I'm tired of her, and I'm rather ashamed of it.
She's so almost unnaturally good! I'm glad she's not in Italy; it makes
for relaxation--for a sort of moral detente. Don't talk of her too much;
it seems to bring her back. She'll come back in plenty of time."

Madame Merle, in fact, had come back before it was too late--too late,
I mean, to recover whatever advantage she might have lost. But meantime,
if, as I have said, she was sensibly different, Isabel's feelings were
also not quite the same. Her consciousness of the situation was as
acute as of old, but it was much less satisfying. A dissatisfied mind,
whatever else it may miss, is rarely in want of reasons; they bloom as
thick as buttercups in June. The fact of Madame Merle's having had a
hand in Gilbert Osmond's marriage ceased to be one of her titles to
consideration; it might have been written, after all, that there was not
so much to thank her for. As time went on there was less and less, and
Isabel once said to herself that perhaps without her these things would
not have been. That reflection indeed was instantly stifled; she knew an
immediate horror at having made it. "Whatever happens to me let me not
be unjust," she said; "let me bear my burdens myself and not shift them
upon others!" This disposition was tested, eventually, by that ingenious
apology for her present conduct which Madame Merle saw fit to make
and of which I have given a sketch; for there was something
irritating--there was almost an air of mockery--in her neat
discriminations and clear convictions. In Isabel's mind to-day there
was nothing clear; there was a confusion of regrets, a complication of
fears. She felt helpless as she turned away from her friend, who had
just made the statements I have quoted: Madame Merle knew so little
what she was thinking of! She was herself moreover so unable to
explain. Jealous of her--jealous of her with Gilbert? The idea just then
suggested no near reality. She almost wished jealousy had been possible;
it would have made in a manner for refreshment. Wasn't it in a manner
one of the symptoms of happiness? Madame Merle, however, was wise, so
wise that she might have been pretending to know Isabel better than
Isabel knew herself. This young woman had always been fertile in
resolutions--any of them of an elevated character; but at no period had
they flourished (in the privacy of her heart) more richly than to-day.
It is true that they all had a family likeness; they might have been
summed up in the determination that if she was to be unhappy it should
not be by a fault of her own. Her poor winged spirit had always had
a great desire to do its best, and it had not as yet been seriously
discouraged. It wished, therefore, to hold fast to justice--not to
pay itself by petty revenges. To associate Madame Merle with its
disappointment would be a petty revenge--especially as the pleasure to
be derived from that would be perfectly insincere. It might feed
her sense of bitterness, but it would not loosen her bonds. It was
impossible to pretend that she had not acted with her eyes open; if ever
a girl was a free agent she had been. A girl in love was doubtless not a
free agent; but the sole source of her mistake had been within herself.
There had been no plot, no snare; she had looked and considered and
chosen. When a woman had made such a mistake, there was only one way to
repair it--just immensely (oh, with the highest grandeur!) to accept it.
One folly was enough, especially when it was to last for ever; a second
one would not much set it off. In this vow of reticence there was a
certain nobleness which kept Isabel going; but Madame Merle had been
right, for all that, in taking her precautions.

One day about a month after Ralph Touchett's arrival in Rome Isabel
came back from a walk with Pansy. It was not only a part of her general
determination to be just that she was at present very thankful for
Pansy--it was also a part of her tenderness for things that were pure
and weak. Pansy was dear to her, and there was nothing else in her
life that had the rightness of the young creature's attachment or
the sweetness of her own clearness about it. It was like a soft
presence--like a small hand in her own; on Pansy's part it was more than
an affection--it was a kind of ardent coercive faith. On her own side
her sense of the girl's dependence was more than a pleasure; it operated
as a definite reason when motives threatened to fail her. She had said
to herself that we must take our duty where we find it, and that we
must look for it as much as possible. Pansy's sympathy was a direct
admonition; it seemed to say that here was an opportunity, not eminent
perhaps, but unmistakeable. Yet an opportunity for what Isabel could
hardly have said; in general, to be more for the child than the child
was able to be for herself. Isabel could have smiled, in these days, to
remember that her little companion had once been ambiguous, for she
now perceived that Pansy's ambiguities were simply her own grossness of
vision. She had been unable to believe any one could care so much--so
extraordinarily much--to please. But since then she had seen this
delicate faculty in operation, and now she knew what to think of it. It
was the whole creature--it was a sort of genius. Pansy had no pride to
interfere with it, and though she was constantly extending her conquests
she took no credit for them. The two were constantly together; Mrs.
Osmond was rarely seen without her stepdaughter. Isabel liked her
company; it had the effect of one's carrying a nosegay composed all
of the same flower. And then not to neglect Pansy, not under any
provocation to neglect her--this she had made an article of religion.
The young girl had every appearance of being happier in Isabel's society
than in that of any one save her father,--whom she admired with an
intensity justified by the fact that, as paternity was an exquisite
pleasure to Gilbert Osmond, he had always been luxuriously mild. Isabel
knew how Pansy liked to be with her and how she studied the means of
pleasing her. She had decided that the best way of pleasing her was
negative, and consisted in not giving her trouble--a conviction which
certainly could have had no reference to trouble already existing. She
was therefore ingeniously passive and almost imaginatively docile; she
was careful even to moderate the eagerness with which she assented to
Isabel's propositions and which might have implied that she could have
thought otherwise. She never interrupted, never asked social questions,
and though she delighted in approbation, to the point of turning pale
when it came to her, never held out her hand for it. She only looked
toward it wistfully--an attitude which, as she grew older, made her eyes
the prettiest in the world. When during the second winter at Palazzo
Roccanera she began to go to parties, to dances, she always, at a
reasonable hour, lest Mrs. Osmond should be tired, was the first to
propose departure. Isabel appreciated the sacrifice of the late dances,
for she knew her little companion had a passionate pleasure in this
exercise, taking her steps to the music like a conscientious fairy.
Society, moreover, had no drawbacks for her; she liked even the tiresome
parts--the heat of ball-rooms, the dulness of dinners, the crush at
the door, the awkward waiting for the carriage. During the day, in this
vehicle, beside her stepmother, she sat in a small fixed, appreciative
posture, bending forward and faintly smiling, as if she had been taken
to drive for the first time.

On the day I speak of they had been driven out of one of the gates of
the city and at the end of half an hour had left the carriage to await
them by the roadside while they walked away over the short grass of the
Campagna, which even in the winter months is sprinkled with delicate
flowers. This was almost a daily habit with Isabel, who was fond of a
walk and had a swift length of step, though not so swift a one as on her
first coming to Europe. It was not the form of exercise that Pansy loved
best, but she liked it, because she liked everything; and she moved with
a shorter undulation beside her father's wife, who afterwards, on their
return to Rome, paid a tribute to her preferences by making the circuit
of the Pincian or the Villa Borghese. She had gathered a handful of
flowers in a sunny hollow, far from the walls of Rome, and on reaching
Palazzo Roccanera she went straight to her room, to put them into
water. Isabel passed into the drawing-room, the one she herself usually
occupied, the second in order from the large ante-chamber which was
entered from the staircase and in which even Gilbert Osmond's rich
devices had not been able to correct a look of rather grand nudity. Just
beyond the threshold of the drawing-room she stopped short, the
reason for her doing so being that she had received an impression. The
impression had, in strictness, nothing unprecedented; but she felt it as
something new, and the soundlessness of her step gave her time to take
in the scene before she interrupted it. Madame Merle was there in her
bonnet, and Gilbert Osmond was talking to her; for a minute they were
unaware she had come in. Isabel had often seen that before, certainly;
but what she had not seen, or at least had not noticed, was that their
colloquy had for the moment converted itself into a sort of familiar
silence, from which she instantly perceived that her entrance would
startle them. Madame Merle was standing on the rug, a little way from
the fire; Osmond was in a deep chair, leaning back and looking at her.
Her head was erect, as usual, but her eyes were bent on his. What struck
Isabel first was that he was sitting while Madame Merle stood; there was
an anomaly in this that arrested her. Then she perceived that they had
arrived at a desultory pause in their exchange of ideas and were musing,
face to face, with the freedom of old friends who sometimes exchange
ideas without uttering them. There was nothing to shock in this; they
were old friends in fact. But the thing made an image, lasting only a
moment, like a sudden flicker of light. Their relative positions, their
absorbed mutual gaze, struck her as something detected. But it was all
over by the time she had fairly seen it. Madame Merle had seen her and
had welcomed her without moving; her husband, on the other hand, had
instantly jumped up. He presently murmured something about wanting a
walk and, after having asked their visitor to excuse him, left the room.

"I came to see you, thinking you would have come in; and as you hadn't I
waited for you," Madame Merle said.

"Didn't he ask you to sit down?" Isabel asked with a smile.

Madame Merle looked about her. "Ah, it's very true; I was going away."

"You must stay now."

"Certainly. I came for a reason; I've something on my mind."

"I've told you that before," Isabel said--"that it takes something
extraordinary to bring you to this house."

"And you know what I've told YOU; that whether I come or whether I stay
away, I've always the same motive--the affection I bear you."

"Yes, you've told me that."

"You look just now as if you didn't believe it," said Madame Merle.

"Ah," Isabel answered, "the profundity of your motives, that's the last
thing I doubt!"

"You doubt sooner of the sincerity of my words."

Isabel shook her head gravely. "I know you've always been kind to me."

"As often as you would let me. You don't always take it; then one has
to let you alone. It's not to do you a kindness, however, that I've come
to-day; it's quite another affair. I've come to get rid of a trouble of
my own--to make it over to you. I've been talking to your husband about
it."

"I'm surprised at that; he doesn't like troubles."

"Especially other people's; I know very well. But neither do you, I
suppose. At any rate, whether you do or not, you must help me. It's
about poor Mr. Rosier."

"Ah," said Isabel reflectively, "it's his trouble then, not yours."

"He has succeeded in saddling me with it. He comes to see me ten times a
week, to talk about Pansy."

"Yes, he wants to marry her. I know all about it."

Madame Merle hesitated. "I gathered from your husband that perhaps you
didn't."

"How should he know what I know? He has never spoken to me of the
matter."

"It's probably because he doesn't know how to speak of it."

"It's nevertheless the sort of question in which he's rarely at fault."

"Yes, because as a general thing he knows perfectly well what to think.
To-day he doesn't."

"Haven't you been telling him?" Isabel asked.

Madame Merle gave a bright, voluntary smile. "Do you know you're a
little dry?"

"Yes; I can't help it. Mr. Rosier has also talked to me."

"In that there's some reason. You're so near the child."

"Ah," said Isabel, "for all the comfort I've given him! If you think me
dry, I wonder what HE thinks."

"I believe he thinks you can do more than you have done."

"I can do nothing."

"You can do more at least than I. I don't know what mysterious
connection he may have discovered between me and Pansy; but he came to
me from the first, as if I held his fortune in my hand. Now he keeps
coming back, to spur me up, to know what hope there is, to pour out his
feelings."

"He's very much in love," said Isabel.

"Very much--for him."

"Very much for Pansy, you might say as well."

Madame Merle dropped her eyes a moment. "Don't you think she's
attractive?"

"The dearest little person possible--but very limited."

"She ought to be all the easier for Mr. Rosier to love. Mr. Rosier's not
unlimited."

"No," said Isabel, "he has about the extent of one's
pocket-handkerchief--the small ones with lace borders." Her humour had
lately turned a good deal to sarcasm, but in a moment she was ashamed
of exercising it on so innocent an object as Pansy's suitor. "He's very
kind, very honest," she presently added; "and he's not such a fool as he
seems."

"He assures me that she delights in him," said Madame Merle.

"I don't know; I've not asked her."

"You've never sounded her a little?"

"It's not my place; it's her father's."

"Ah, you're too literal!" said Madame Merle.

"I must judge for myself."

Madame Merle gave her smile again. "It isn't easy to help you."

"To help me?" said Isabel very seriously. "What do you mean?"

"It's easy to displease you. Don't you see how wise I am to be careful?
I notify you, at any rate, as I notified Osmond, that I wash my hands of
the love-affairs of Miss Pansy and Mr. Edward Rosier. Je n'y peux rien,
moi! I can't talk to Pansy about him. Especially," added Madame Merle,
"as I don't think him a paragon of husbands."

Isabel reflected a little; after which, with a smile, "You don't wash
your hands then!" she said. After which again she added in another tone:
"You can't--you're too much interested."

Madame Merle slowly rose; she had given Isabel a look as rapid as the
intimation that had gleamed before our heroine a few moments before.
Only this time the latter saw nothing. "Ask him the next time, and
you'll see."

"I can't ask him; he has ceased to come to the house. Gilbert has let
him know that he's not welcome."

"Ah yes," said Madame Merle, "I forgot that--though it's the burden of
his lamentation. He says Osmond has insulted him. All the same," she
went on, "Osmond doesn't dislike him so much as he thinks." She had got
up as if to close the conversation, but she lingered, looking about her,
and had evidently more to say. Isabel perceived this and even saw the
point she had in view; but Isabel also had her own reasons for not
opening the way.

"That must have pleased him, if you've told him," she answered, smiling.

"Certainly I've told him; as far as that goes I've encouraged him. I've
preached patience, have said that his case isn't desperate if he'll only
hold his tongue and be quiet. Unfortunately he has taken it into his
head to be jealous."

"Jealous?"

"Jealous of Lord Warburton, who, he says, is always here."

Isabel, who was tired, had remained sitting; but at this she also rose.
"Ah!" she exclaimed simply, moving slowly to the fireplace. Madame
Merle observed her as she passed and while she stood a moment before the
mantel-glass and pushed into its place a wandering tress of hair.

"Poor Mr. Rosier keeps saying there's nothing impossible in Lord
Warburton's falling in love with Pansy," Madame Merle went on. Isabel
was silent a little; she turned away from the glass. "It's true--there's
nothing impossible," she returned at last, gravely and more gently.

"So I've had to admit to Mr. Rosier. So, too, your husband thinks."

"That I don't know."

"Ask him and you'll see."

"I shall not ask him," said Isabel.

"Pardon me; I forgot you had pointed that out. Of course," Madame Merle
added, "you've had infinitely more observation of Lord Warburton's
behaviour than I."

"I see no reason why I shouldn't tell you that he likes my stepdaughter
very much."

Madame Merle gave one of her quick looks again. "Likes her, you mean--as
Mr. Rosier means?"

"I don't know how Mr. Rosier means; but Lord Warburton has let me know
that he's charmed with Pansy."

"And you've never told Osmond?" This observation was immediate,
precipitate; it almost burst from Madame Merle's lips.

Isabel's eyes rested on her. "I suppose he'll know in time; Lord
Warburton has a tongue and knows how to express himself."

Madame Merle instantly became conscious that she had spoken more quickly
than usual, and the reflection brought the colour to her cheek. She gave
the treacherous impulse time to subside and then said as if she had been
thinking it over a little: "That would be better than marrying poor Mr.
Rosier."

"Much better, I think."

"It would be very delightful; it would be a great marriage. It's really
very kind of him."

"Very kind of him?"

"To drop his eyes on a simple little girl."

"I don't see that."

"It's very good of you. But after all, Pansy Osmond--"

"After all, Pansy Osmond's the most attractive person he has ever
known!" Isabel exclaimed.

Madame Merle stared, and indeed she was justly bewildered. "Ah, a moment
ago I thought you seemed rather to disparage her."

"I said she was limited. And so she is. And so's Lord Warburton."

"So are we all, if you come to that. If it's no more than Pansy
deserves, all the better. But if she fixes her affections on Mr. Rosier
I won't admit that she deserves it. That will be too perverse."

"Mr. Rosier's a nuisance!" Isabel cried abruptly.

"I quite agree with you, and I'm delighted to know that I'm not expected
to feed his flame. For the future, when he calls on me, my door shall be
closed to him." And gathering her mantle together Madame Merle prepared
to depart. She was checked, however, on her progress to the door, by an
inconsequent request from Isabel.

"All the same, you know, be kind to him."

She lifted her shoulders and eyebrows and stood looking at her friend.
"I don't understand your contradictions! Decidedly I shan't be kind to
him, for it will be a false kindness. I want to see her married to Lord
Warburton."

"You had better wait till he asks her."

"If what you say's true, he'll ask her. Especially," said Madame Merle
in a moment, "if you make him."

"If I make him?"

"It's quite in your power. You've great influence with him."

Isabel frowned a little. "Where did you learn that?"

"Mrs. Touchett told me. Not you--never!" said Madame Merle, smiling.

"I certainly never told you anything of the sort."

"You MIGHT have done so--so far as opportunity went--when we were by
way of being confidential with each other. But you really told me very
little; I've often thought so since."

Isabel had thought so too, and sometimes with a certain satisfaction.
But she didn't admit it now--perhaps because she wished not to appear to
exult in it. "You seem to have had an excellent informant in my aunt,"
she simply returned.

"She let me know you had declined an offer of marriage from Lord
Warburton, because she was greatly vexed and was full of the subject.
Of course I think you've done better in doing as you did. But if you
wouldn't marry Lord Warburton yourself, make him the reparation of
helping him to marry some one else."

Isabel listened to this with a face that persisted in not reflecting
the bright expressiveness of Madame Merle's. But in a moment she said,
reasonably and gently enough: "I should be very glad indeed if, as
regards Pansy, it could be arranged." Upon which her companion, who
seemed to regard this as a speech of good omen, embraced her more
tenderly than might have been expected and triumphantly withdrew.


