ACT V. SCENE I.


--A CHURCH YARD.

  _Enter two_ Clowns,[1] _with spades, &c._ (L.H.U.E.)

_1st Clo._ (R.) Is she to be buried in christian burial that wilfully
seeks her own salvation?

_2nd Clo._ (L.) I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave
straight:[2] the crowner[3] hath set on her, and finds it christian
burial.

_1st Clo._ How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own
defence?

_2nd Clo._ Why, 'tis found so.

_1st Clo._ It must be _se offendendo_;[4] it cannot be else. For here
lies the point: If I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an
act hath three branches; it is, to act, to do, and to perform:[5]
argal,[6] she drowned herself wittingly.

_2nd Clo._ Nay, but hear you, goodman delver.[7]

_1st Clo._ Give me leave. Here lies the water; good: here stands the
man; good: If the man go to this water, and drown himself, it is,
will he, nill he, he goes,[8] mark you that; but if the water come
to him and drown him, he drowns not himself: argal, he that is not
guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.

_2nd Clo._ But is this law?

_1st Clo._ Ay, marry is't; crowner's-quest law.[9]

_2nd Clo._ Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not been a
gentlewoman, she should have been buried out of christian burial.

_1st Clo._ Why, there thou say'st:[10] And the more pity that great
folks should have countenance in this world to drown or hang
themselves, more than their even christian.[11] Come, my spade. There
is no ancient gentlemen but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers:
they hold up Adam's profession.

_2nd Clo._ Was he a gentleman?[12]

_1st Clo._ He was the first that ever bore arms. I'll put another
question to thee: if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess
thyself----[13]

_2nd Clo._ Go to.

_1st Clo._ What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
shipwright, or the carpenter?

_2nd Clo._ The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
tenants.

_1st Clo._ I like thy wit well, in good faith: the gallows does well;
But how does it well? it does well to those that do ill: now, thou
dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church: argal,
the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come.

_2nd Clo._ Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
carpenter?

_1st Clo._ Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.[14]

_2nd Clo._ Marry, now I can tell.

_1st Clo._ To't.

_2nd Clo._ Mass, I cannot tell.

_1st Clo._ Cudgel thy brains no more about it,[15] for your dull ass
will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this
question next, say, a grave-maker, the houses that he makes, last
till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan, and fetch me a stoup of
liquor.[16]

  [_Exit_ 2nd Clown, L.H.U.E.]

  _Enter_ HAMLET _and_ HORATIO (L.H.U.E.)

  First Clown _digs and sings._

    _In youth, when I did love, did love_,[17]
      _Methought, it was very sweet_,
    _To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove_
      _O, methought, there was nothing meet._

_Ham._

  (_Behind the grave._)

Has this fellow no feeling of his business, he sings at grave-making?

_Hor._

  (_On_ HAMLET'S R.)

Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.

_Ham._ 'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath the daintier
sense.[18]

_1st Clo._
  _But age, with his stealing steps_,
    _Hath clawed me in his clutch_,
  _And hath shipped me into the land_,
    _As if I had never been such._

  [_Throws up a skull._]

_Ham._ That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: How the
knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain's jaw-bone, that did
the first murder! This might be the pate of a politician, which this
ass now o'er-reaches; one that would circumvent Heaven, might it not?

_Hor._ It might, my lord.

  [_Gravedigger throws up bones._]

_Ham._ Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at
loggats with them?[19] mine ache to think on't.

_1st Clo._

  [_Sings._]

  _A pick-axe and a spade, a spade_,
    _For and a shrouding sheet:_[20]
  _O, a pit of clay for to be made_
    _For such a guest is meet._

  [_Throws up a skull._

_Ham._ There's another: Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
Where be his quiddits now, his quillets,[21] his cases, his tenures,
and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him
about the sconce[22] with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of
his action of battery? I will speak to this fellow.--Whose grave's
this, sirrah?

_1st Clo._ Mine, sir.--

  [_Sings._]

  _O, a pit of clay for to be made_
    _For such a guest is meet._

_Ham._ (R. _of grave._) I think it be thine, indeed; for thou liest
in't.

_1st Clo._ You lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not yours: for
my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.

_Ham._ Thou dost lie in't, to be in't, and say it is thine: 'tis for
the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

_1st. Clo._ 'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again, from me to you.

_Ham._ What man dost thou dig it for?

_1st Clo._ For no man, sir.

_Ham._ What woman, then?

_1st Clo._ For none, neither.

_Ham._ Who is to be buried in't?

_1st Clo._ One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.

_Ham._ How absolute the knave is![23] we must speak by the card,[24]
or equivocation will undo us,

  [_To_ HORATIO, R.]

How long hast thou been a grave-maker?

_1st Clo._ Of all the days i'the year, I came to't that day that our
last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.

_Ham._ How long's that since?

_1st Clo._ Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: It was the
very day that young Hamlet was born,[25] he that is mad, and sent
into England.

_Ham._ Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

_1st Clo._ Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits there;
or, if he do not, 'tis no great matter there.

_Ham._ Why?

_1st Clo._ 'Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad
as he.

_Ham._ How came he mad?

_1st Clo._ Very strangely, they say.

_Ham._ How strangely?

_1st Clo._ 'Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

_Ham._ Upon what ground?

_1st Clo._ Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton here, man and
boy, thirty years.

_Ham._ How long will a man lie i'the earth ere he rot?

_1st Clo._ 'Faith, if he be not rotten before he die, he will last
you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.

_Ham._ Why he more than another?

_1st Clo._ Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that he
will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer
of your ill-begotten dead body. Here's a skull now, hath lain in the
earth three-and-twenty years.

_Ham._ Whose was it?

_1st Clo._ O, a mad fellow's it was: Whose do you think
it was?

_Ham._ Nay, I know not.

_1st Clo._ A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! he poured a flagon of
Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's skull,
the king's jester.

_Ham._ This?

  [_Takes the skull._]

_1st Clo._ E'en that.

_Ham._ Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him, Horatio: a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy: he hath borne me on his back a
thousand times. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know not
how oft; and now, how abhorred in my imagination it is! Where be your
gibes now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment, that
were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own
grinning? Quite chap-fallen? Now get you to my lady's chamber, and
tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour[26] she must
come; make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

_Hor._ What's that, my lord?

_Ham._ Dost thou think Alexander look'd o'this fashion i'the earth?

_Hor._ E'en so.

_Ham._ And smelt so? pah!

  [_Gives the skull to HORATIO, who returns it to the grave-digger._]

_Hor._ E'en so, my lord.

_Ham._ To what base uses may we return, Horatio! Why may not
imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander, till it find it
stopping a bung-hole?

_Hor._ 'Twere to consider too curiously,[27] to consider so.

_Ham._ No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
enough, and likelihood to lead it: As thus; Alexander died, Alexander
was buried, Alexander returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; And why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might
they not stop a beer barrel?

  Imperial Caesar,[28] dead and turn'd to clay,
  Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:
  O, that the earth, which kept the world in awe,
  Should patch a wall to expel the winter's flaw![29]

  But soft! but soft! aside: Here comes the king,
  The queen, the courtiers: Who is this they follow?
  And with such maimed rites?[30] This doth betoken
  The corse they follow did with desperate hand
  Fordo its own life:[31] 'Twas of some estate.[32]
  Couch we awhile, and mark.

    [_Retiring with_ HORATIO, R.H.]

    _Enter_ Priests, &c., _in procession; the corpse of_ OPHELIA,
    LAERTES _and_ Mourners _following_; KING, QUEEN, _their_
    Trains, _&c._

  _Laer._

    (L. _of the grave._)

  What ceremony else?

  _Ham._ (R.)        That is Laertes,
  A very noble youth.

  _1st Priest._

    (R. _of the grave._)

  Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
  As we have warranty: Her death was doubtful;
  And, but that great command o'ersways the order,[33]
  She should in ground unsanctified have lodged
  Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers,
  Shards,[34] flints, and pebbles, should be thrown on her:
  Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,[35]
  Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
  Of bell and burial.[36]

  _Laer._ Must there no more be done?

  _1st Priest._                      No more be done:
  We should profane the service of the dead
  To sing a _requiem_,[37] and such rest to her
  As to peace-parted souls.

  _Laer._ O, from her fair and unpolluted flesh
  May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,[38]
  A ministering angel shall my sister be,
  When thou liest howling.

  _Ham._                  What, the fair Ophelia!

  _Queen._

    (_Behind the grave_, C. _with the_ KING.)

  Sweets to the sweet: Farewell!

    [_Scattering flowers._]

  I hop'd thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
  I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
  And not have strew'd thy grave.

  _Laer._                        O, treble woe
  Fall ten times treble on that cursed head,
  Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense[39]
  Depriv'd thee of!--Hold off the earth a while,
  Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:

    [_Leaps into the grave._]

  Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
  Till of this flat a mountain you have made,
  To o'ertop old Pelion,[40] or the skyish head
  Of blue Olympus.

  _Ham._

    (_Advancing._)

                  What is he whose grief
  Bears such an emphasis?--whose phrase of sorrow
  Conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
  Like wonder-wounded hearers?--this is I,
  Hamlet the Dane.

  _Laer._

    (L., _leaping from the grave._)

  The devil take thy soul!

    [_Grappling with him._]

  _Ham._ (R.C.)           Thou pray'st not well.
  I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat;
  For, though I am not splenetive and rash,
  Yet have I in me something dangerous,
  Which let thy wisdom fear: Hold off thy hand!

  _King._ Pluck them asunder.

  _Queen._ (C.)              Hamlet, Hamlet!

  _Ham._ (R.C.) Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
  Until my eyelids will no longer wag.

  _Queen._ O my son, what theme?

  _Ham._ I lov'd Ophelia: forty thousand brothers
  Could not, with all their quantity of love,
  Make up my sum.--What wilt thou do for her?

  _Queen._ O, he is mad, Laertes.

  _Ham._ Come, show me what thou'lt do:
  Wou'lt weep? wou'lt fight? wou'lt fast? wou'lt tear thyself?
  I'll do't.--Dost thou come here to whine?
  To outface me[41] with leaping in her grave?
  Be buried quick with her, and so will I:
  And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
  Millions of acres on us, till our ground,[42]
  Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
  Make Ossa[43] like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
  I'll rant as well as thou.

  _Queen._               This is mere madness:
  And thus a while the fit will work on him;
  Anon, as patient as the female dove,
  When that her golden couplets are disclos'd,[44]
  His silence will sit drooping.

  _Ham._                     Hear you, sir;
  What is the reason that you use me thus?
  I lov'd you ever: But it is no matter;
  Let Hercules himself do what he may,
  The cat will mew,[45] and dog will have his day.

    [_Exit_, R.H.]

  _King._ (C.) I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

    [_Exit_ HORATIO, R.H.]

  Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son,

    [_Exit_ QUEEN, _attended_, R.H.]

  Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech;[46]

    [_To_ LAERTES.]

  We'll put the matter to the present push.--
  This grave shall have a living monument:[47]
  An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
  Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

    [_The characters group round the grave._]



