SCENE II.

--HALL IN THE CASTLE.

    _Enter_ HAMLET _and_ HORATIO (R.H.)

  _Ham._ But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
  That to Laertes I forgot myself;
  For by the image of my cause,[48] I see
  The portraiture of his.

  _Hor._                 Peace! who comes here?

    _Enter_ OSRIC (L.H.)

  _Osr._ Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

_Ham._ (C.) I humbly thank you, sir.--Dost know this water-fly?[49]

_Hor._ (R.) No, my good lord.

_Ham._ Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to know him.

_Osr._ (L.) Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should
impart a thing to you from his majesty.

_Ham._ I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit.[50] Your
bonnet to his right use; 'tis for the head.

_Osr._ I thank your lordship, 'tis very hot.

_Ham._ No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.

_Osr._ It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

_Ham._ But yet, methinks it is very sultry and hot,[51] for my
complexion,--

_Osr._ Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere,--I cannot
tell how.--But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you, that he
has laid a great wager on your head: Sir, this is the matter,--

_Ham._ I beseech you, remember----

  [HAMLET _moves him to put on his hat._]

_Osr._ Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith.[52] Sir, here
is newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great
showing:[53] Indeed, to speak feelingly of him,[54] he is the card or
calendar of gentry,[55] for you shall find in him the continent of
what part a gentleman would see.[56]

_Ham._ What imports the nomination of this gentleman?[57]

_Osr._ Of Laertes?

_Ham._ Of him, sir.

_Osr._ Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is--

_Ham._ I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in
excellence; but, to know a man well, were to know himself.[58]

_Osr._ I mean, sir, for his weapon.

_Ham._ What is his weapon?

_Osr._ Rapier and dagger.

_Ham._ That's two of his weapons: but, well.

_Osr._ The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses:
against the which he has imponed,[59] as I take it, six French
rapiers and poignards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers,[60] or
so: Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal
conceit.[61]

_Ham._ What call you the carriages?

_Osr._ The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

_Ham._ The phrase would be more german[62] to the matter, if we could
carry cannon by our sides.

_Osr._ The king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes between
yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; and it would
come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe the
answer.[63]

_Ham._ How if I answer no?[64]

_Osr._ I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.

_Ham._ Sir, it is the breathing time of day with me; let the foils be
brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose, I will
win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and
the odd hits.

_Osr._ Shall I deliver you so?

_Ham._ To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.

_Osr._ I commend my duty to your lordship. [_Exit_, L.H.]

_Hor._ (R.) You will lose this wager, my lord.

_Ham._ (C.) I do not think so; since he went into France, I have been
in continual practice; I shall win at the odds.[65] But thou wouldst
not think how ill all's here about my heart: but it is no matter.

_Hor._ Nay, good my lord.

_Ham._ It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving,[66]
as would, perhaps, trouble a woman.

_Hor._ If your mind dislike any thing, obey it:[67] I will forestall
their repair hither, and say, you are not fit.

_Ham._ Not a whit, we defy augury: there is a special providence in
the fall of a sparrow.

  [_Exeunt_, L.H.]



