11 IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS


His visit to M. de Treville being paid, the pensive d'Artagnan took the
longest way homeward.

On what was d'Artagnan thinking, that he strayed thus from his path,
gazing at the stars of heaven, and sometimes sighing, sometimes smiling?

He was thinking of Mme. Bonacieux. For an apprentice Musketeer the young
woman was almost an ideal of love. Pretty, mysterious, initiated in
almost all the secrets of the court, which reflected such a charming
gravity over her pleasing features, it might be surmised that she was
not wholly unmoved; and this is an irresistible charm to novices in
love. Moreover, d'Artagnan had delivered her from the hands of the
demons who wished to search and ill treat her; and this important
service had established between them one of those sentiments of
gratitude which so easily assume a more tender character.

D'Artagnan already fancied himself, so rapid is the flight of our dreams
upon the wings of imagination, accosted by a messenger from the young
woman, who brought him some billet appointing a meeting, a gold chain,
or a diamond. We have observed that young cavaliers received presents
from their king without shame. Let us add that in these times of lax
morality they had no more delicacy with respect to the mistresses; and
that the latter almost always left them valuable and durable
remembrances, as if they essayed to conquer the fragility of their
sentiments by the solidity of their gifts.

Without a blush, men made their way in the world by the means of women
blushing. Such as were only beautiful gave their beauty, whence, without
doubt, comes the proverb, "The most beautiful girl in the world can only
give what she has." Such as were rich gave in addition a part of their
money; and a vast number of heroes of that gallant period may be cited
who would neither have won their spurs in the first place, nor their
battles afterward, without the purse, more or less furnished, which
their mistress fastened to the saddle bow.

D'Artagnan owned nothing. Provincial diffidence, that slight varnish,
the ephemeral flower, that down of the peach, had evaporated to the
winds through the little orthodox counsels which the three Musketeers
gave their friend. D'Artagnan, following the strange custom of the
times, considered himself at Paris as on a campaign, neither more nor
less than if he had been in Flanders--Spain yonder, woman here. In each
there was an enemy to contend with, and contributions to be levied.

But, we must say, at the present moment d'Artagnan was ruled by a
feeling much more noble and disinterested. The mercer had said that he
was rich; the young man might easily guess that with so weak a man as M.
Bonacieux; and interest was almost foreign to this commencement of love,
which had been the consequence of it. We say ALMOST, for the idea that a
young, handsome, kind, and witty woman is at the same time rich takes
nothing from the beginning of love, but on the contrary strengthens it.

There are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and caprices which
are highly becoming to beauty. A fine and white stocking, a silken robe,
a lace kerchief, a pretty slipper on the foot, a tasty ribbon on the
head do not make an ugly woman pretty, but they make a pretty woman
beautiful, without reckoning the hands, which gain by all this; the
hands, among women particularly, to be beautiful must be idle.

Then d'Artagnan, as the reader, from whom we have not concealed the
state of his fortune, very well knows--d'Artagnan was not a millionaire;
he hoped to become one someday, but the time which in his own mind he
fixed upon for this happy change was still far distant. In the
meanwhile, how disheartening to see the woman one loves long for those
thousands of nothings which constitute a woman's happiness, and be
unable to give her those thousands of nothings. At least, when the woman
is rich and the lover is not, that which he cannot offer she offers to
herself; and although it is generally with her husband's money that she
procures herself this indulgence, the gratitude for it seldom reverts to
him.

Then d'Artagnan, disposed to become the most tender of lovers, was at
the same time a very devoted friend. In the midst of his amorous
projects for the mercer's wife, he did not forget his friends. The
pretty Mme. Bonacieux was just the woman to walk with in the Plain St.
Denis or in the fair of St. Germain, in company with Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis, to whom d'Artagnan had often remarked this. Then one could enjoy
charming little dinners, where one touches on one side the hand of a
friend, and on the other the foot of a mistress. Besides, on pressing
occasions, in extreme difficulties, d'Artagnan would become the
preserver of his friends.

And M. Bonacieux, whom d'Artagnan had pushed into the hands of the
officers, denying him aloud although he had promised in a whisper to
save him? We are compelled to admit to our readers that d'Artagnan
thought nothing about him in any way; or that if he did think of him, it
was only to say to himself that he was very well where he was, wherever
it might be. Love is the most selfish of all the passions.

Let our readers reassure themselves. If d'Artagnan forgets his host, or
appears to forget him, under the pretense of not knowing where he has
been carried, we will not forget him, and we know where he is. But for
the moment, let us do as did the amorous Gascon; we will see after the
worthy mercer later.

D'Artagnan, reflecting on his future amours, addressing himself to the
beautiful night, and smiling at the stars, ascended the Rue
Cherish-Midi, or Chase-Midi, as it was then called. As he found himself
in the quarter in which Aramis lived, he took it into his head to pay
his friend a visit in order to explain the motives which had led him to
send Planchet with a request that he would come instantly to the
mousetrap. Now, if Aramis had been at home when Planchet came to his
abode, he had doubtless hastened to the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and finding
nobody there but his other two companions perhaps, they would not be
able to conceive what all this meant. This mystery required an
explanation; at least, so d'Artagnan declared to himself.

He likewise thought this was an opportunity for talking about pretty
little Mme. Bonacieux, of whom his head, if not his heart, was already
full. We must never look for discretion in first love. First love is
accompanied by such excessive joy that unless the joy be allowed to
overflow, it will stifle you.

Paris for two hours past had been dark, and seemed a desert. Eleven
o'clock sounded from all the clocks of the Faubourg St. Germain. It was
delightful weather. D'Artagnan was passing along a lane on the spot
where the Rue d'Assas is now situated, breathing the balmy emanations
which were borne upon the wind from the Rue de Vaugirard, and which
arose from the gardens refreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze
of night. From a distance resounded, deadened, however, by good
shutters, the songs of the tipplers, enjoying themselves in the cabarets
scattered along the plain. Arrived at the end of the lane, d'Artagnan
turned to the left. The house in which Aramis dwelt was situated between
the Rue Cassette and the Rue Servandoni.

D'Artagnan had just passed the Rue Cassette, and already perceived the
door of his friend's house, shaded by a mass of sycamores and clematis
which formed a vast arch opposite the front of it, when he perceived
something like a shadow issuing from the Rue Servandoni. This something
was enveloped in a cloak, and d'Artagnan at first believed it was a man;
but by the smallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and the
indecision of the step, he soon discovered that it was a woman. Further,
this woman, as if not certain of the house she was seeking, lifted up
her eyes to look around her, stopped, went backward, and then returned
again. D'Artagnan was perplexed.

"Shall I go and offer her my services?" thought he. "By her step she
must be young; perhaps she is pretty. Oh, yes! But a woman who wanders
in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meet her lover. If I
should disturb a rendezvous, that would not be the best means of
commencing an acquaintance."

Meantime the young woman continued to advance, counting the houses and
windows. This was neither long nor difficult. There were but three
hotels in this part of the street; and only two windows looking toward
the road, one of which was in a pavilion parallel to that which Aramis
occupied, the other belonging to Aramis himself.

"PARIDIEU!" said d'Artagnan to himself, to whose mind the niece of the
theologian reverted, "PARDIEU, it would be droll if this belated dove
should be in search of our friend's house. But on my soul, it looks so.
Ah, my dear Aramis, this time I shall find you out." And d'Artagnan,
making himself as small as he could, concealed himself in the darkest
side of the street near a stone bench placed at the back of a niche.

The young woman continued to advance; and in addition to the lightness
of her step, which had betrayed her, she emitted a little cough which
denoted a sweet voice. D'Artagnan believed this cough to be a signal.

Nevertheless, whether the cough had been answered by a similar signal
which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker, or whether
without this aid she saw that she had arrived at the end of her journey,
she resolutely drew near to Aramis's shutter, and tapped, at three equal
intervals, with her bent finger.

"This is all very fine, dear Aramis," murmured d'Artagnan. "Ah, Monsieur
Hypocrite, I understand how you study theology."

The three blows were scarcely struck, when the inside blind was opened
and a light appeared through the panes of the outside shutter.

"Ah, ah!" said the listener, "not through doors, but through windows!
Ah, this visit was expected. We shall see the windows open, and the lady
enter by escalade. Very pretty!"

But to the great astonishment of d'Artagnan, the shutter remained
closed. Still more, the light which had shone for an instant
disappeared, and all was again in obscurity.

D'Artagnan thought this could not last long, and continued to look with
all his eyes and listen with all his ears.

He was right; at the end of some seconds two sharp taps were heard
inside. The young woman in the street replied by a single tap, and the
shutter was opened a little way.

It may be judged whether d'Artagnan looked or listened with avidity.
Unfortunately the light had been removed into another chamber; but the
eyes of the young man were accustomed to the night. Besides, the eyes of
the Gascons have, as it is asserted, like those of cats, the faculty of
seeing in the dark.

D'Artagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket a white
object, which she unfolded quickly, and which took the form of a
handkerchief. She made her interlocutor observe the corner of this
unfolded object.

This immediately recalled to d'Artagnan's mind the handkerchief which he
had found at the feet of Mme. Bonacieux, which had reminded him of that
which he had dragged from under the feet of Aramis.

"What the devil could that handkerchief signify?"

Placed where he was, d'Artagnan could not perceive the face of Aramis.
We say Aramis, because the young man entertained no doubt that it was
his friend who held this dialogue from the interior with the lady of the
exterior. Curiosity prevailed over prudence; and profiting by the
preoccupation into which the sight of the handkerchief appeared to have
plunged the two personages now on the scene, he stole from his hiding
place, and quick as lightning, but stepping with utmost caution, he ran
and placed himself close to the angle of the wall, from which his eye
could pierce the interior of Aramis's room.

Upon gaining this advantage d'Artagnan was near uttering a cry of
surprise; it was not Aramis who was conversing with the nocturnal
visitor, it was a woman! D'Artagnan, however, could only see enough to
recognize the form of her vestments, not enough to distinguish her
features.

At the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchief from her
pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just been shown to her. Then
some words were spoken by the two women. At length the shutter closed.
The woman who was outside the window turned round, and passed within
four steps of d'Artagnan, pulling down the hood of her mantle; but the
precaution was too late, d'Artagnan had already recognized Mme.
Bonacieux.

Mme. Bonacieux! The suspicion that it was she had crossed the mind of
d'Artagnan when she drew the handkerchief from her pocket; but what
probability was there that Mme. Bonacieux, who had sent for M. Laporte
in order to be reconducted to the Louvre, should be running about the
streets of Paris at half past eleven at night, at the risk of being
abducted a second time?

This must be, then, an affair of importance; and what is the most
important affair to a woman of twenty-five! Love.

But was it on her own account, or on account of another, that she
exposed herself to such hazards? This was a question the young man asked
himself, whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed, being in heart
neither more nor less than an accepted lover.

There was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither Mme.
Bonacieux was going; that was to follow her. This method was so simple
that d'Artagnan employed it quite naturally and instinctively.

But at the sight of the young man, who detached himself from the wall
like a statue walking from its niche, and at the noise of the steps
which she heard resound behind her, Mme. Bonacieux uttered a little cry
and fled.

D'Artagnan ran after her. It was not difficult for him to overtake a
woman embarrassed with her cloak. He came up with her before she had
traversed a third of the street. The unfortunate woman was exhausted,
not by fatigue, but by terror, and when d'Artagnan placed his hand upon
her shoulder, she sank upon one knee, crying in a choking voice, "Kill
me, if you please, you shall know nothing!"

D'Artagnan raised her by passing his arm round her waist; but as he felt
by her weight she was on the point of fainting, he made haste to
reassure her by protestations of devotedness. These protestations were
nothing for Mme. Bonacieux, for such protestations may be made with the
worst intentions in the world; but the voice was all. Mme. Bonacieux
thought she recognized the sound of that voice; she reopened her eyes,
cast a quick glance upon the man who had terrified her so, and at once
perceiving it was d'Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, "Oh, it is you,
it is you! Thank God, thank God!"

"Yes, it is I," said d'Artagnan, "it is I, whom God has sent to watch
over you."

"Was it with that intention you followed me?" asked the young woman,
with a coquettish smile, whose somewhat bantering character resumed its
influence, and with whom all fear had disappeared from the moment in
which she recognized a friend in one she had taken for an enemy.

"No," said d'Artagnan; "no, I confess it. It was chance that threw me in
your way; I saw a woman knocking at the window of one of my friends."

"One of your friends?" interrupted Mme. Bonacieux.

"Without doubt; Aramis is one of my best friends."

"Aramis! Who is he?"

"Come, come, you won't tell me you don't know Aramis?"

"This is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced."

"It is the first time, then, that you ever went to that house?"

"Undoubtedly."

"And you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?"

"No."

"By a Musketeer?"

"No, indeed!"

"It was not he, then, you came to seek?"

"Not the least in the world. Besides, you must have seen that the person
to whom I spoke was a woman."

"That is true; but this woman is a friend of Aramis--"

"I know nothing of that."

"--since she lodges with him."

"That does not concern me."

"But who is she?"

"Oh, that is not my secret."

"My dear Madame Bonacieux, you are charming; but at the same time you
are one of the most mysterious women."

"Do I lose by that?"

"No; you are, on the contrary, adorable."

"Give me your arm, then."

"Most willingly. And now?"

"Now escort me."

"Where?"

"Where I am going."

"But where are you going?"

"You will see, because you will leave me at the door."

"Shall I wait for you?"

"That will be useless."

"You will return alone, then?"

"Perhaps yes, perhaps no."

"But will the person who shall accompany you afterward be a man or a
woman?"

"I don't know yet."

"But I will know it!"

"How so?"

"I will wait until you come out."

"In that case, adieu."

"Why so?"

"I do not want you."

"But you have claimed--"

"The aid of a gentleman, not the watchfulness of a spy."

"The word is rather hard."

"How are they called who follow others in spite of them?"

"They are indiscreet."

"The word is too mild."

"Well, madame, I perceive I must do as you wish."

"Why did you deprive yourself of the merit of doing so at once?"

"Is there no merit in repentance?"

"And do you really repent?"

"I know nothing about it myself. But what I know is that I promise to do
all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where you are going."

"And you will leave me then?"

"Yes."

"Without waiting for my coming out again?"

"Yes."

"Word of honor?"

"By the faith of a gentleman. Take my arm, and let us go."

D'Artagnan offered his arm to Mme. Bonacieux, who willingly took it,
half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Rue de la
Harpe. Arriving there, the young woman seemed to hesitate, as she had
before done in the Rue Vaugirard. She seemed, however, by certain signs,
to recognize a door, and approaching that door, "And now, monsieur,"
said she, "it is here I have business; a thousand thanks for your
honorable company, which has saved me from all the dangers to which,
alone, I was exposed. But the moment is come to keep your word; I have
reached my destination."

"And you will have nothing to fear on your return?"

"I shall have nothing to fear but robbers."

"And that is nothing?"

"What could they take from me? I have not a penny about me."

"You forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms."

"Which?"

"That which I found at your feet, and replaced in your pocket."

"Hold your tongue, imprudent man! Do you wish to destroy me?"

"You see very plainly that there is still danger for you, since a single
word makes you tremble; and you confess that if that word were heard you
would be ruined. Come, come, madame!" cried d'Artagnan, seizing her
hands, and surveying her with an ardent glance, "come, be more generous.
Confide in me. Have you not read in my eyes that there is nothing but
devotion and sympathy in my heart?"

"Yes," replied Mme. Bonacieux; "therefore, ask my own secrets, and I
will reveal them to you; but those of others--that is quite another
thing."

"Very well," said d'Artagnan, "I shall discover them; as these secrets
may have an influence over your life, these secrets must become mine."

"Beware of what you do!" cried the young woman, in a manner so serious
as to make d'Artagnan start in spite of himself. "Oh, meddle in nothing
which concerns me. Do not seek to assist me in that which I am
accomplishing. This I ask of you in the name of the interest with which
I inspire you, in the name of the service you have rendered me and which
I never shall forget while I have life. Rather, place faith in what I
tell you. Have no more concern about me; I exist no longer for you, any
more than if you had never seen me."

"Must Aramis do as much as I, madame?" said d'Artagnan, deeply piqued.

"This is the second or third time, monsieur, that you have repeated that
name, and yet I have told you that I do not know him."

"You do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked? Indeed,
madame, you believe me too credulous!"

"Confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that you invent this
story and create this personage."

"I invent nothing, madame; I create nothing. I only speak that exact
truth."

"And you say that one of your friends lives in that house?"

"I say so, and I repeat it for the third time; that house is one
inhabited by my friend, and that friend is Aramis."

"All this will be cleared up at a later period," murmured the young
woman; "no, monsieur, be silent."

"If you could see my heart," said d'Artagnan, "you would there read so
much curiosity that you would pity me and so much love that you would
instantly satisfy my curiosity. We have nothing to fear from those who
love us."

"You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur," said the young woman,
shaking her head.

"That is because love has come suddenly upon me, and for the first time;
and because I am only twenty."

The young woman looked at him furtively.

"Listen; I am already upon the scent," resumed d'Artagnan. "About three
months ago I was near having a duel with Aramis concerning a
handkerchief resembling the one you showed to the woman in his
house--for a handkerchief marked in the same manner, I am sure."

"Monsieur," said the young woman, "you weary me very much, I assure you,
with your questions."

"But you, madame, prudent as you are, think, if you were to be arrested
with that handkerchief, and that handkerchief were to be seized, would
you not be compromised?"

"In what way? The initials are only mine--C. B., Constance Bonacieux."

"Or Camille de Bois-Tracy."

"Silence, monsieur! Once again, silence! Ah, since the dangers I incur
on my own account cannot stop you, think of those you may yourself run!"

"Me?"

"Yes; there is peril of imprisonment, risk of life in knowing me."

"Then I will not leave you."

"Monsieur!" said the young woman, supplicating him and clasping her
hands together, "monsieur, in the name of heaven, by the honor of a
soldier, by the courtesy of a gentleman, depart! There, there midnight
sounds! That is the hour when I am expected."

"Madame," said the young man, bowing; "I can refuse nothing asked of me
thus. Be content; I will depart."

"But you will not follow me; you will not watch me?"

"I will return home instantly."

"Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man," said Mme.
Bonacieux, holding out her hand to him, and placing the other upon the
knocker of a little door almost hidden in the wall.

D'Artagnan seized the hand held out to him, and kissed it ardently.

"Ah! I wish I had never seen you!" cried d'Artagnan, with that ingenuous
roughness which women often prefer to the affectations of politeness,
because it betrays the depths of the thought and proves that feeling
prevails over reason.

"Well!" resumed Mme. Bonacieux, in a voice almost caressing, and
pressing the hand of d'Artagnan, who had not relinquished hers, "well: I
will not say as much as you do; what is lost for today may not be lost
forever. Who knows, when I shall be at liberty, that I may not satisfy
your curiosity?"

"And will you make the same promise to my love?" cried d'Artagnan,
beside himself with joy.

"Oh, as to that, I do not engage myself. That depends upon the
sentiments with which you may inspire me."

"Then today, madame--"

"Oh, today, I am no further than gratitude."

"Ah! You are too charming," said d'Artagnan, sorrowfully; "and you abuse
my love."

"No, I use your generosity, that's all. But be of good cheer; with
certain people, everything comes round."

"Oh, you render me the happiest of men! Do not forget this evening--do
not forget that promise."

"Be satisfied. In the proper time and place I will remember everything.
Now then, go, go, in the name of heaven! I was expected at sharp
midnight, and I am late."

"By five minutes."

"Yes; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages."

"When one loves."

"Well! And who told you I had no affair with a lover?"

"It is a man, then, who expects you?" cried d'Artagnan. "A man!"

"The discussion is going to begin again!" said Mme. Bonacieux, with a
half-smile which was not exempt from a tinge of impatience.

"No, no; I go, I depart! I believe in you, and I would have all the
merit of my devotion, even if that devotion were stupidity. Adieu,
madame, adieu!"

And as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violent effort
from the hand he held, he sprang away, running, while Mme. Bonacieux
knocked, as at the shutter, three light and regular taps. When he had
gained the angle of the street, he turned. The door had been opened, and
shut again; the mercer's pretty wife had disappeared.

D'Artagnan pursued his way. He had given his word not to watch Mme.
Bonacieux, and if his life had depended upon the spot to which she was
going or upon the person who should accompany her, d'Artagnan would have
returned home, since he had so promised. Five minutes later he was in
the Rue des Fossoyeurs.

"Poor Athos!" said he; "he will never guess what all this means. He will
have fallen asleep waiting for me, or else he will have returned home,
where he will have learned that a woman had been there. A woman with
Athos! After all," continued d'Artagnan, "there was certainly one with
Aramis. All this is very strange; and I am curious to know how it will
end."

"Badly, monsieur, badly!" replied a voice which the young man recognized
as that of Planchet; for, soliloquizing aloud, as very preoccupied
people do, he had entered the alley, at the end of which were the stairs
which led to his chamber.

"How, badly? What do you mean by that, you idiot?" asked d'Artagnan.
"What has happened?"

"All sorts of misfortunes."

"What?"

"In the first place, Monsieur Athos is arrested."

"Arrested! Athos arrested! What for?"

"He was found in your lodging; they took him for you."

"And by whom was he arrested?"

"By Guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight."

"Why did he not tell them his name? Why did he not tell them he knew
nothing about this affair?"

"He took care not to do so, monsieur; on the contrary, he came up to me
and said, 'It is your master that needs his liberty at this moment and
not I, since he knows everything and I know nothing. They will believe
he is arrested, and that will give him time; in three days I will tell
them who I am, and they cannot fail to let me go.'"

"Bravo, Athos! Noble heart!" murmured d'Artagnan. "I know him well
there! And what did the officers do?"

"Four conveyed him away, I don't know where--to the Bastille or Fort
l'Eveque. Two remained with the men in black, who rummaged every place
and took all the papers. The last two mounted guard at the door during
this examination; then, when all was over, they went away, leaving the
house empty and exposed."

"And Porthos and Aramis?"

"I could not find them; they did not come."

"But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaited them?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"Well, don't budge, then; if they come, tell them what has happened. Let
them wait for me at the Pomme-de-Pin. Here it would be dangerous; the
house may be watched. I will run to Monsieur de Treville to tell them
all this, and will meet them there."

"Very well, monsieur," said Planchet.

"But you will remain; you are not afraid?" said d'Artagnan, coming back
to recommend courage to his lackey.

"Be easy, monsieur," said Planchet; "you do not know me yet. I am brave
when I set about it. It is all in beginning. Besides, I am a Picard."

"Then it is understood," said d'Artagnan; "you would rather be killed
than desert your post?"

"Yes, monsieur; and there is nothing I would not do to prove to Monsieur
that I am attached to him."

"Good!" said d'Artagnan to himself. "It appears that the method I have
adopted with this boy is decidedly the best. I shall use it again upon
occasion."

And with all the swiftness of his legs, already a little fatigued,
however, with the perambulations of the day, d'Artagnan directed his
course toward M. de Treville's.

M de Treville was not at his hotel. His company was on guard at the
Louvre; he was at the Louvre with his company.

It was necessary to reach M. de Treville; it was important that he
should be informed of what was passing. D'Artagnan resolved to try and
enter the Louvre. His costume of Guardsman in the company of M.
Dessessart ought to be his passport.

He therefore went down the Rue des Petits Augustins, and came up to the
quay, in order to take the New Bridge. He had at first an idea of
crossing by the ferry; but on gaining the riverside, he had mechanically
put his hand into his pocket, and perceived that he had not wherewithal
to pay his passage.

As he gained the top of the Rue Guenegaud, he saw two persons coming out
of the Rue Dauphine whose appearance very much struck him. Of the two
persons who composed this group, one was a man and the other a woman.
The woman had the outline of Mme. Bonacieux; the man resembled Aramis so
much as to be mistaken for him.

Besides, the woman wore that black mantle which d'Artagnan could still
see outlined on the shutter of the Rue de Vaugirard and on the door of
the Rue de la Harpe; still further, the man wore the uniform of a
Musketeer.

The woman's hood was pulled down, and the man held a handkerchief to his
face. Both, as this double precaution indicated, had an interest in not
being recognized.

They took the bridge. That was d'Artagnan's road, as he was going to the
Louvre. D'Artagnan followed them.

He had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that the woman
was really Mme. Bonacieux and that the man was Aramis.

He felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitating his
heart. He felt himself doubly betrayed, by his friend and by her whom he
already loved like a mistress. Mme. Bonacieux had declared to him, by
all the gods, that she did not know Aramis; and a quarter of an hour
after having made this assertion, he found her hanging on the arm of
Aramis.

D'Artagnan did not reflect that he had only known the mercer's pretty
wife for three hours; that she owed him nothing but a little gratitude
for having delivered her from the men in black, who wished to carry her
off, and that she had promised him nothing. He considered himself an
outraged, betrayed, and ridiculed lover. Blood and anger mounted to his
face; he was resolved to unravel the mystery.

The young man and young woman perceived they were watched, and redoubled
their speed. D'Artagnan determined upon his course. He passed them, then
returned so as to meet them exactly before the Samaritaine, which was
illuminated by a lamp which threw its light over all that part of the
bridge.

D'Artagnan stopped before them, and they stopped before him.

"What do you want, monsieur?" demanded the Musketeer, recoiling a step,
and with a foreign accent, which proved to d'Artagnan that he was
deceived in one of his conjectures.

"It is not Aramis!" cried he.

"No, monsieur, it is not Aramis; and by your exclamation I perceive you
have mistaken me for another, and pardon you."

"You pardon me?" cried d'Artagnan.

"Yes," replied the stranger. "Allow me, then, to pass on, since it is
not with me you have anything to do."

"You are right, monsieur, it is not with you that I have anything to do;
it is with Madame."

"With Madame! You do not know her," replied the stranger.

"You are deceived, monsieur; I know her very well."

"Ah," said Mme. Bonacieux; in a tone of reproach, "ah, monsieur, I had
your promise as a soldier and your word as a gentleman. I hoped to be
able to rely upon that."

"And I, madame!" said d'Artagnan, embarrassed; "you promised me--"

"Take my arm, madame," said the stranger, "and let us continue our way."

D'Artagnan, however, stupefied, cast down, annihilated by all that
happened, stood, with crossed arms, before the Musketeer and Mme.
Bonacieux.

The Musketeer advanced two steps, and pushed d'Artagnan aside with his
hand. D'Artagnan made a spring backward and drew his sword. At the same
time, and with the rapidity of lightning, the stranger drew his.

"In the name of heaven, my Lord!" cried Mme. Bonacieux, throwing herself
between the combatants and seizing the swords with her hands.

"My Lord!" cried d'Artagnan, enlightened by a sudden idea, "my Lord!
Pardon me, monsieur, but you are not--"

"My Lord the Duke of Buckingham," said Mme. Bonacieux, in an undertone;
"and now you may ruin us all."

"My Lord, Madame, I ask a hundred pardons! But I love her, my Lord, and
was jealous. You know what it is to love, my Lord. Pardon me, and then
tell me how I can risk my life to serve your Grace?"

"You are a brave young man," said Buckingham, holding out his hand to
d'Artagnan, who pressed it respectfully. "You offer me your services;
with the same frankness I accept them. Follow us at a distance of twenty
paces, as far as the Louvre, and if anyone watches us, slay him!"

D'Artagnan placed his naked sword under his arm, allowed the duke and
Mme. Bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead, and then followed them, ready
to execute the instructions of the noble and elegant minister of Charles
I.

Fortunately, he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof of his
devotion, and the young woman and the handsome Musketeer entered the
Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without any interference.

As for d'Artagnan, he immediately repaired to the cabaret of the
Pomme-de-Pin, where he found Porthos and Aramis awaiting him. Without
giving them any explanation of the alarm and inconvenience he had caused
them, he told them that he had terminated the affair alone in which he
had for a moment believed he should need their assistance.

Meanwhile, carried away as we are by our narrative, we must leave our
three friends to themselves, and follow the Duke of Buckingham and his
guide through the labyrinths of the Louvre.





12 GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM


Mme. Bonacieux and the duke entered the Louvre without difficulty. Mme.
Bonacieux was known to belong to the queen; the duke wore the uniform of
the Musketeers of M. de Treville, who, as we have said, were that
evening on guard. Besides, Germain was in the interests of the queen;
and if anything should happen, Mme. Bonacieux would be accused of having
introduced her lover into the Louvre, that was all. She took the risk
upon herself. Her reputation would be lost, it is true; but of what
value in the world was the reputation of the little wife of a mercer?

Once within the interior of the court, the duke and the young woman
followed the wall for the space of about twenty-five steps. This space
passed, Mme. Bonacieux pushed a little servants' door, open by day but
generally closed at night. The door yielded. Both entered, and found
themselves in darkness; but Mme. Bonacieux was acquainted with all the
turnings and windings of this part of the Louvre, appropriated for the
people of the household. She closed the door after her, took the duke by
the hand, and after a few experimental steps, grasped a balustrade, put
her foot upon the bottom step, and began to ascend the staircase. The
duke counted two stories. She then turned to the right, followed the
course of a long corridor, descended a flight, went a few steps farther,
introduced a key into a lock, opened a door, and pushed the duke into an
apartment lighted only by a lamp, saying, "Remain here, my Lord Duke;
someone will come." She then went out by the same door, which she
locked, so that the duke found himself literally a prisoner.

Nevertheless, isolated as he was, we must say that the Duke of
Buckingham did not experience an instant of fear. One of the salient
points of his character was the search for adventures and a love of
romance. Brave, rash, and enterprising, this was not the first time he
had risked his life in such attempts. He had learned that the pretended
message from Anne of Austria, upon the faith of which he had come to
Paris, was a snare; but instead of regaining England, he had, abusing
the position in which he had been placed, declared to the queen that he
would not depart without seeing her. The queen had at first positively
refused; but at length became afraid that the duke, if exasperated,
would commit some folly. She had already decided upon seeing him and
urging his immediate departure, when, on the very evening of coming to
this decision, Mme. Bonacieux, who was charged with going to fetch the
duke and conducting him to the Louvre, was abducted. For two days no one
knew what had become of her, and everything remained in suspense; but
once free, and placed in communication with Laporte, matters resumed
their course, and she accomplished the perilous enterprise which, but
for her arrest, would have been executed three days earlier.

Buckingham, left alone, walked toward a mirror. His Musketeer's uniform
became him marvelously.

At thirty-five, which was then his age, he passed, with just title, for
the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalier of France or
England.

The favorite of two kings, immensely rich, all-powerful in a kingdom
which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at his caprice, George
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, had lived one of those fabulous existences
which survive, in the course of centuries, to astonish posterity.

Sure of himself, convinced of his own power, certain that the laws which
rule other men could not reach him, he went straight to the object he
aimed at, even were this object were so elevated and so dazzling that it
would have been madness for any other even to have contemplated it. It
was thus he had succeeded in approaching several times the beautiful and
proud Anne of Austria, and in making himself loved by dazzling her.

George Villiers placed himself before the glass, as we have said,
restored the undulations to his beautiful hair, which the weight of his
hat had disordered, twisted his mustache, and, his heart swelling with
joy, happy and proud at being near the moment he had so long sighed for,
he smiled upon himself with pride and hope.

At this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened, and a woman
appeared. Buckingham saw this apparition in the glass; he uttered a cry.
It was the queen!

Anne of Austria was then twenty-six or twenty-seven years of age; that
is to say, she was in the full splendor of her beauty.

Her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess; her eyes, which cast the
brilliancy of emeralds, were perfectly beautiful, and yet were at the
same time full of sweetness and majesty.

Her mouth was small and rosy; and although her underlip, like that of
all princes of the House of Austria, protruded slightly beyond the
other, it was eminently lovely in its smile, but as profoundly
disdainful in its contempt.

Her skin was admired for its velvety softness; her hands and arms were
of surpassing beauty, all the poets of the time singing them as
incomparable.

Lastly, her hair, which, from being light in her youth, had become
chestnut, and which she wore curled very plainly, and with much powder,
admirably set off her face, in which the most rigid critic could only
have desired a little less rouge, and the most fastidious sculptor a
little more fineness in the nose.

Buckingham remained for a moment dazzled. Never had Anne of Austria
appeared to him so beautiful, amid balls, fetes, or carousals, as she
appeared to him at this moment, dressed in a simple robe of white satin,
and accompanied by Donna Estafania--the only one of her Spanish women
who had not been driven from her by the jealousy of the king or by the
persecutions of Richelieu.

Anne of Austria took two steps forward. Buckingham threw himself at her
feet, and before the queen could prevent him, kissed the hem of her
robe.

"Duke, you already know that it is not I who caused you to be written
to."

"Yes, yes, madame! Yes, your Majesty!" cried the duke. "I know that I
must have been mad, senseless, to believe that snow would become
animated or marble warm; but what then! They who love believe easily in
love. Besides, I have lost nothing by this journey because I see you."

"Yes," replied Anne, "but you know why and how I see you; because,
insensible to all my sufferings, you persist in remaining in a city
where, by remaining, you run the risk of your life, and make me run the
risk of my honor. I see you to tell you that everything separates
us--the depths of the sea, the enmity of kingdoms, the sanctity of vows.
It is sacrilege to struggle against so many things, my Lord. In short, I
see you to tell you that we must never see each other again."

"Speak on, madame, speak on, Queen," said Buckingham; "the sweetness of
your voice covers the harshness of your words. You talk of sacrilege!
Why, the sacrilege is the separation of two hearts formed by God for
each other."

"My Lord," cried the queen, "you forget that I have never said that I
love you."

"But you have never told me that you did not love me; and truly, to
speak such words to me would be, on the part of your Majesty, too great
an ingratitude. For tell me, where can you find a love like mine--a love
which neither time, nor absence, nor despair can extinguish, a love
which contents itself with a lost ribbon, a stray look, or a chance
word? It is now three years, madame, since I saw you for the first time,
and during those three years I have loved you thus. Shall I tell you
each ornament of your toilet? Mark! I see you now. You were seated upon
cushions in the Spanish fashion; you wore a robe of green satin
embroidered with gold and silver, hanging sleeves knotted upon your
beautiful arms--those lovely arms--with large diamonds. You wore a close
ruff, a small cap upon your head of the same color as your robe, and in
that cap a heron's feather. Hold! Hold! I shut my eyes, and I can see
you as you then were; I open them again, and I see what you are now--a
hundred times more beautiful!"

"What folly," murmured Anne of Austria, who had not the courage to find
fault with the duke for having so well preserved her portrait in his
heart, "what folly to feed a useless passion with such remembrances!"

"And upon what then must I live? I have nothing but memory. It is my
happiness, my treasure, my hope. Every time I see you is a fresh diamond
which I enclose in the casket of my heart. This is the fourth which you
have let fall and I have picked up; for in three years, madame, I have
only seen you four times--the first, which I have described to you; the
second, at the mansion of Madame de Chevreuse; the third, in the gardens
of Amiens."

"Duke," said the queen, blushing, "never speak of that evening."

"Oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it! That is
the most happy and brilliant evening of my life! You remember what a
beautiful night it was? How soft and perfumed was the air; how lovely
the blue heavens and star-enameled sky! Ah, then, madame, I was able for
one instant to be alone with you. Then you were about to tell me
all--the isolation of your life, the griefs of your heart. You leaned
upon my arm--upon this, madame! I felt, in bending my head toward you,
your beautiful hair touch my cheek; and every time that it touched me I
trembled from head to foot. Oh, Queen! Queen! You do not know what
felicity from heaven, what joys from paradise, are comprised in a moment
like that. Take my wealth, my fortune, my glory, all the days I have to
live, for such an instant, for a night like that. For that night,
madame, that night you loved me, I will swear it."

"My Lord, yes; it is possible that the influence of the place, the charm
of the beautiful evening, the fascination of your look--the thousand
circumstances, in short, which sometimes unite to destroy a woman--were
grouped around me on that fatal evening; but, my Lord, you saw the queen
come to the aid of the woman who faltered. At the first word you dared
to utter, at the first freedom to which I had to reply, I called for
help."

"Yes, yes, that is true. And any other love but mine would have sunk
beneath this ordeal; but my love came out from it more ardent and more
eternal. You believed that you would fly from me by returning to Paris;
you believed that I would not dare to quit the treasure over which my
master had charged me to watch. What to me were all the treasures in the
world, or all the kings of the earth! Eight days after, I was back
again, madame. That time you had nothing to say to me; I had risked my
life and favor to see you but for a second. I did not even touch your
hand, and you pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant."

"Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I took no part,
as you well know, my Lord. The king, excited by the cardinal, made a
terrible clamor. Madame de Vernet was driven from me, Putange was
exiled, Madame de Chevreuse fell into disgrace, and when you wished to
come back as ambassador to France, the king himself--remember, my
lord--the king himself opposed it."

"Yes, and France is about to pay for her king's refusal with a war. I am
not allowed to see you, madame, but you shall every day hear of me. What
object, think you, have this expedition to Re and this league with the
Protestants of La Rochelle which I am projecting? The pleasure of seeing
you. I have no hope of penetrating, sword in hand, to Paris, I know that
well. But this war may bring round a peace; this peace will require a
negotiator; that negotiator will be me. They will not dare to refuse me
then; and I will return to Paris, and will see you again, and will be
happy for an instant. Thousands of men, it is true, will have to pay for
my happiness with their lives; but what is that to me, provided I see
you again! All this is perhaps folly--perhaps insanity; but tell me what
woman has a lover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?"

"My Lord, my Lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuse you
more strongly. All these proofs of love which you would give me are
almost crimes."

"Because you do not love me, madame! If you loved me, you would view all
this otherwise. If you loved me, oh, if you loved me, that would be too
great happiness, and I should run mad. Ah, Madame de Chevreuse was less
cruel than you. Holland loved her, and she responded to his love."

"Madame de Chevreuse was not queen," murmured Anne of Austria, overcome,
in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a passion.

"You would love me, then, if you were not queen! Madame, say that you
would love me then! I can believe that it is the dignity of your rank
alone which makes you cruel to me; I can believe that, had you been
Madame de Chevreuse, poor Buckingham might have hoped. Thanks for those
sweet words! Oh, my beautiful sovereign, a hundred times, thanks!"

"Oh, my Lord! You have ill understood, wrongly interpreted; I did not
mean to say--"

"Silence, silence!" cried the duke. "If I am happy in an error, do not
have the cruelty to lift me from it. You have told me yourself, madame,
that I have been drawn into a snare; I, perhaps, may leave my life in
it--for, although it may be strange, I have for some time had a
presentiment that I should shortly die." And the duke smiled, with a
smile at once sad and charming.

"Oh, my God!" cried Anne of Austria, with an accent of terror which
proved how much greater an interest she took in the duke than she
ventured to tell.

"I do not tell you this, madame, to terrify you; no, it is even
ridiculous for me to name it to you, and, believe me, I take no heed of
such dreams. But the words you have just spoken, the hope you have
almost given me, will have richly paid all--were it my life."

"Oh, but I," said Anne, "I also, duke, have had presentiments; I also
have had dreams. I dreamed that I saw you lying bleeding, wounded."

"In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?" interrupted
Buckingham.

"Yes, it was so, my Lord, it was so--in the left side, and with a knife.
Who can possibly have told you I had had that dream? I have imparted it
to no one but my God, and that in my prayers."

"I ask for no more. You love me, madame; it is enough."

"I love you, I?"

"Yes, yes. Would God send the same dreams to you as to me if you did not
love me? Should we have the same presentiments if our existences did not
touch at the heart? You love me, my beautiful queen, and you will weep
for me?"

"Oh, my God, my God!" cried Anne of Austria, "this is more than I can
bear. In the name of heaven, Duke, leave me, go! I do not know whether I
love you or love you not; but what I know is that I will not be
perjured. Take pity on me, then, and go! Oh, if you are struck in
France, if you die in France, if I could imagine that your love for me
was the cause of your death, I could not console myself; I should run
mad. Depart then, depart, I implore you!"

"Oh, how beautiful you are thus! Oh, how I love you!" said Buckingham.

"Go, go, I implore you, and return hereafter! Come back as ambassador,
come back as minister, come back surrounded with guards who will defend
you, with servants who will watch over you, and then I shall no longer
fear for your days, and I shall be happy in seeing you."

"Oh, is this true what you say?"

"Yes."

"Oh, then, some pledge of your indulgence, some object which came from
you, and may remind me that I have not been dreaming; something you have
worn, and that I may wear in my turn--a ring, a necklace, a chain."

"Will you depart--will you depart, if I give you that you demand?"

"Yes."

"This very instant?"

"Yes."

"You will leave France, you will return to England?"

"I will, I swear to you."

"Wait, then, wait."

Anne of Austria re-entered her apartment, and came out again almost
immediately, holding a rosewood casket in her hand, with her cipher
encrusted with gold.

"Here, my Lord, here," said she, "keep this in memory of me."

Buckingham took the casket, and fell a second time on his knees.

"You have promised me to go," said the queen.

"And I keep my word. Your hand, madame, your hand, and I depart!"

Anne of Austria stretched forth her hand, closing her eyes, and leaning
with the other upon Estafania, for she felt that her strength was about
to fail her.

Buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand, and
then rising, said, "Within six months, if I am not dead, I shall have
seen you again, madame--even if I have to overturn the world." And
faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed out of the apartment.

In the corridor he met Mme. Bonacieux, who waited for him, and who, with
the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted him out of the
Louvre.





13 MONSIEUR BONACIEUX


There was in all this, as may have been observed, one personage
concerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, we have
appeared to take but very little notice. This personage was M.
Bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorous intrigues
which entangled themselves so nicely together at this gallant and
chivalric period.

Fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember--fortunately
we have promised not to lose sight of him.

The officers who arrested him conducted him straight to the Bastille,
where he passed trembling before a party of soldiers who were loading
their muskets. Thence, introduced into a half-subterranean gallery, he
became, on the part of those who had brought him, the object of the
grossest insults and the harshest treatment. The officers perceived that
they had not to deal with a gentleman, and they treated him like a very
peasant.

At the end of half an hour or thereabouts, a clerk came to put an end to
his tortures, but not to his anxiety, by giving the order to conduct M.
Bonacieux to the Chamber of Examination. Ordinarily, prisoners were
interrogated in their cells; but they did not do so with M. Bonacieux.

Two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court and enter a
corridor in which were three sentinels, opened a door and pushed him
unceremoniously into a low room, where the only furniture was a table, a
chair, and a commissary. The commissary was seated in the chair, and was
writing at the table.

The two guards led the prisoner toward the table, and upon a sign from
the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hear anything.

The commissary, who had till this time held his head down over his
papers, looked up to see what sort of person he had to do with. This
commissary was a man of very repulsive mien, with a pointed nose, with
yellow and salient cheek bones, with eyes small but keen and
penetrating, and an expression of countenance resembling at once the
polecat and the fox. His head, supported by a long and flexible neck,
issued from his large black robe, balancing itself with a motion very
much like that of the tortoise thrusting his head out of his shell. He
began by asking M. Bonacieux his name, age, condition, and abode.

The accused replied that his name was Jacques Michel Bonacieux, that he
was fifty-one years old, a retired mercer, and lived Rue des Fossoyeurs,
No. 14.

The commissary then, instead of continuing to interrogate him, made him
a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscure citizen to meddle
with public matters. He complicated this exordium by an exposition in
which he painted the power and the deeds of the cardinal, that
incomparable minister, that conqueror of past ministers, that example
for ministers to come--deeds and power which none could thwart with
impunity.

After this second part of his discourse, fixing his hawk's eye upon poor
Bonacieux, he bade him reflect upon the gravity of his situation.

The reflections of the mercer were already made; he cursed the instant
when M. Laporte formed the idea of marrying him to his goddaughter, and
particularly the moment when that goddaughter had been received as Lady
of the Linen to her Majesty.

At bottom the character of M. Bonacieux was one of profound selfishness
mixed with sordid avarice, the whole seasoned with extreme cowardice.
The love with which his young wife had inspired him was a secondary
sentiment, and was not strong enough to contend with the primitive
feelings we have just enumerated. Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had
just been said to him.

"But, Monsieur Commissary," said he, calmly, "believe that I know and
appreciate, more than anybody, the merit of the incomparable eminence by
whom we have the honor to be governed."

"Indeed?" asked the commissary, with an air of doubt. "If that is really
so, how came you in the Bastille?"

"How I came there, or rather why I am there," replied Bonacieux, "that
is entirely impossible for me to tell you, because I don't know myself;
but to a certainty it is not for having, knowingly at least, disobliged
Monsieur the Cardinal."

"You must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you are here and
are accused of high treason."

"Of high treason!" cried Bonacieux, terrified; "of high treason! How is
it possible for a poor mercer, who detests Huguenots and who abhors
Spaniards, to be accused of high treason? Consider, monsieur, the thing
is absolutely impossible."

"Monsieur Bonacieux," said the commissary, looking at the accused as if
his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the very depths of hearts,
"you have a wife?"

"Yes, monsieur," replied the mercer, in a tremble, feeling that it was
at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing; "that is to say,
I HAD one."

"What, you 'had one'? What have you done with her, then, if you have her
no longer?"

"They have abducted her, monsieur."

"They have abducted her? Ah!"

Bonacieux inferred from this "Ah" that the affair grew more and more
intricate.

"They have abducted her," added the commissary; "and do you know the man
who has committed this deed?"

"I think I know him."

"Who is he?"

"Remember that I affirm nothing, Monsieur the Commissary, and that I
only suspect."

"Whom do you suspect? Come, answer freely."

M Bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible. Had he better deny
everything or tell everything? By denying all, it might be suspected
that he must know too much to avow; by confessing all he might prove his
good will. He decided, then, to tell all.

"I suspect," said he, "a tall, dark man, of lofty carriage, who has the
air of a great lord. He has followed us several times, as I think, when
I have waited for my wife at the wicket of the Louvre to escort her
home."

The commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness.

"And his name?" said he.

"Oh, as to his name, I know nothing about it; but if I were ever to meet
him, I should recognize him in an instant, I will answer for it, were he
among a thousand persons."

The face of the commissary grew still darker.

"You should recognize him among a thousand, say you?" continued he.

"That is to say," cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a false step,
"that is to say--"

"You have answered that you should recognize him," said the commissary.
"That is all very well, and enough for today; before we proceed further,
someone must be informed that you know the ravisher of your wife."

"But I have not told you that I know him!" cried Bonacieux, in despair.
"I told you, on the contrary--"

"Take away the prisoner," said the commissary to the two guards.

"Where must we place him?" demanded the chief.

"In a dungeon."

"Which?"

"Good Lord! In the first one handy, provided it is safe," said the
commissary, with an indifference which penetrated poor Bonacieux with
horror.

"Alas, alas!" said he to himself, "misfortune is over my head; my wife
must have committed some frightful crime. They believe me her
accomplice, and will punish me with her. She must have spoken; she must
have confessed everything--a woman is so weak! A dungeon! The first he
comes to! That's it! A night is soon passed; and tomorrow to the wheel,
to the gallows! Oh, my God, my God, have pity on me!"

Without listening the least in the world to the lamentations of M.
Bonacieux--lamentations to which, besides, they must have been pretty
well accustomed--the two guards took the prisoner each by an arm, and
led him away, while the commissary wrote a letter in haste and
dispatched it by an officer in waiting.

Bonacieux could not close his eyes; not because his dungeon was so very
disagreeable, but because his uneasiness was so great. He sat all night
on his stool, starting at the least noise; and when the first rays of
the sun penetrated into his chamber, the dawn itself appeared to him to
have taken funereal tints.

All at once he heard his bolts drawn, and made a terrified bound. He
believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold; so that when he
saw merely and simply, instead of the executioner he expected, only his
commissary of the preceding evening, attended by his clerk, he was ready
to embrace them both.

"Your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening, my
good man, and I advise you to tell the whole truth; for your repentance
alone can remove the anger of the cardinal."

"Why, I am ready to tell everything," cried Bonacieux, "at least, all
that I know. Interrogate me, I entreat you!"

"Where is your wife, in the first place?"

"Why, did not I tell you she had been stolen from me?"

"Yes, but yesterday at five o'clock in the afternoon, thanks to you, she
escaped."

"My wife escaped!" cried Bonacieux. "Oh, unfortunate creature! Monsieur,
if she has escaped, it is not my fault, I swear."

"What business had you, then, to go into the chamber of Monsieur
d'Artagnan, your neighbor, with whom you had a long conference during
the day?"

"Ah, yes, Monsieur Commissary; yes, that is true, and I confess that I
was in the wrong. I did go to Monsieur d'Artagnan's."

"What was the aim of that visit?"

"To beg him to assist me in finding my wife. I believed I had a right to
endeavor to find her. I was deceived, as it appears, and I ask your
pardon."

"And what did Monsieur d'Artagnan reply?"

"Monsieur d'Artagnan promised me his assistance; but I soon found out
that he was betraying me."

"You impose upon justice. Monsieur d'Artagnan made a compact with you;
and in virtue of that compact put to flight the police who had arrested
your wife, and has placed her beyond reach."

"M. d'Artagnan has abducted my wife! Come now, what are you telling me?"

"Fortunately, Monsieur d'Artagnan is in our hands, and you shall be
confronted with him."

"By my faith, I ask no better," cried Bonacieux; "I shall not be sorry
to see the face of an acquaintance."

"Bring in the Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the commissary to the guards.
The two guards led in Athos.

"Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the commissary, addressing Athos, "declare
all that passed yesterday between you and Monsieur."

"But," cried Bonacieux, "this is not Monsieur d'Artagnan whom you show
me."

"What! Not Monsieur d'Artagnan?" exclaimed the commissary.

"Not the least in the world," replied Bonacieux.

"What is this gentleman's name?" asked the commissary.

"I cannot tell you; I don't know him."

"How! You don't know him?"

"No."

"Did you never see him?"

"Yes, I have seen him, but I don't know what he calls himself."

"Your name?" replied the commissary.

"Athos," replied the Musketeer.

"But that is not a man's name; that is the name of a mountain," cried
the poor questioner, who began to lose his head.

"That is my name," said Athos, quietly.

"But you said that your name was d'Artagnan."

"Who, I?"

"Yes, you."

"Somebody said to me, 'You are Monsieur d'Artagnan?' I answered, 'You
think so?' My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it. I did not wish
to contradict them; besides, I might be deceived."

"Monsieur, you insult the majesty of justice."

"Not at all," said Athos, calmly.

"You are Monsieur d'Artagnan."

"You see, monsieur, that you say it again."

"But I tell you, Monsieur Commissary," cried Bonacieux, in his turn,
"there is not the least doubt about the matter. Monsieur d'Artagnan is
my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent--and even better on that
account ought I to know him. Monsieur d'Artagnan is a young man,
scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this gentleman must be thirty at least.
Monsieur d'Artagnan is in Monsieur Dessessart's Guards, and this
gentleman is in the company of Monsieur de Treville's Musketeers. Look
at his uniform, Monsieur Commissary, look at his uniform!"

"That's true," murmured the commissary; "PARDIEU, that's true."

At this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger, introduced
by one of the gatekeepers of the Bastille, gave a letter to the
commissary.

"Oh, unhappy woman!" cried the commissary.

"How? What do you say? Of whom do you speak? It is not of my wife, I
hope!"

"On the contrary, it is of her. Yours is a pretty business."

"But," said the agitated mercer, "do me the pleasure, monsieur, to tell
me how my own proper affair can become worse by anything my wife does
while I am in prison?"

"Because that which she does is part of a plan concerted between you--of
an infernal plan."

"I swear to you, Monsieur Commissary, that you are in the profoundest
error, that I know nothing in the world about what my wife had to do,
that I am entirely a stranger to what she has done; and that if she has
committed any follies, I renounce her, I abjure her, I curse her!"

"Bah!" said Athos to the commissary, "if you have no more need of me,
send me somewhere. Your Monsieur Bonacieux is very tiresome."

The commissary designated by the same gesture Athos and Bonacieux, "Let
them be guarded more closely than ever."

"And yet," said Athos, with his habitual calmness, "if it be Monsieur
d'Artagnan who is concerned in this matter, I do not perceive how I can
take his place."

"Do as I bade you," cried the commissary, "and preserve absolute
secrecy. You understand!"

Athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently, while M.
Bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heart of a tiger.

They locked the mercer in the same dungeon where he had passed the
night, and left him to himself during the day. Bonacieux wept all day,
like a true mercer, not being at all a military man, as he himself
informed us. In the evening, about nine o'clock, at the moment he had
made up his mind to go to bed, he heard steps in his corridor. These
steps drew near to his dungeon, the door was thrown open, and the guards
appeared.

"Follow me," said an officer, who came up behind the guards.

"Follow you!" cried Bonacieux, "follow you at this hour! Where, my God?"

"Where we have orders to lead you."

"But that is not an answer."

"It is, nevertheless, the only one we can give."

"Ah, my God, my God!" murmured the poor mercer, "now, indeed, I am
lost!" And he followed the guards who came for him, mechanically and
without resistance.

He passed along the same corridor as before, crossed one court, then a
second side of a building; at length, at the gate of the entrance court
he found a carriage surrounded by four guards on horseback. They made
him enter this carriage, the officer placed himself by his side, the
door was locked, and they were left in a rolling prison. The carriage
was put in motion as slowly as a funeral car. Through the closely
fastened windows the prisoner could perceive the houses and the
pavement, that was all; but, true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could
recognize every street by the milestones, the signs, and the lamps. At
the moment of arriving at St. Paul--the spot where such as were
condemned at the Bastille were executed--he was near fainting and
crossed himself twice. He thought the carriage was about to stop there.
The carriage, however, passed on.

Farther on, a still greater terror seized him on passing by the cemetery
of St. Jean, where state criminals were buried. One thing, however,
reassured him; he remembered that before they were buried their heads
were generally cut off, and he felt that his head was still on his
shoulders. But when he saw the carriage take the way to La Greve, when
he perceived the pointed roof of the Hotel de Ville, and the carriage
passed under the arcade, he believed it was over with him. He wished to
confess to the officer, and upon his refusal, uttered such pitiable
cries that the officer told him that if he continued to deafen him thus,
he should put a gag in his mouth.

This measure somewhat reassured Bonacieux. If they meant to execute him
at La Greve, it could scarcely be worth while to gag him, as they had
nearly reached the place of execution. Indeed, the carriage crossed the
fatal spot without stopping. There remained, then, no other place to
fear but the Traitor's Cross; the carriage was taking the direct road to
it.

This time there was no longer any doubt; it was at the Traitor's Cross
that lesser criminals were executed. Bonacieux had flattered himself in
believing himself worthy of St. Paul or of the Place de Greve; it was at
the Traitor's Cross that his journey and his destiny were about to end!
He could not yet see that dreadful cross, but he felt somehow as if it
were coming to meet him. When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard
a noise of people and the carriage stopped. This was more than poor
Bonacieux could endure, depressed as he was by the successive emotions
which he had experienced; he uttered a feeble groan which night have
been taken for the last sigh of a dying man, and fainted.





14 THE MAN OF MEUNG


The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to be hanged, but
by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.

The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its way,
passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St. Honore, turned into the
Rue des Bons Enfants, and stopped before a low door.

The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms from the
officer who supported him. They carried him through an alley, up a
flight of stairs, and deposited him in an antechamber.

All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as he was
concerned. He had walked as one walks in a dream; he had a glimpse of
objects as through a fog. His ears had perceived sounds without
comprehending them; he might have been executed at that moment without
his making a single gesture in his own defense or uttering a cry to
implore mercy.

He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall and his
hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guards placed him.

On looking around him, however, as he could perceive no threatening
object, as nothing indicated that he ran any real danger, as the bench
was comfortably covered with a well-stuffed cushion, as the wall was
ornamented with a beautiful Cordova leather, and as large red damask
curtains, fastened back by gold clasps, floated before the window, he
perceived by degrees that his fear was exaggerated, and he began to turn
his head to the right and the left, upward and downward.

At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a little courage, and
ventured to draw up one leg and then the other. At length, with the help
of his two hands he lifted himself from the bench, and found himself on
his feet.

At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door, continued
to exchange some words with a person in the next chamber and then came
up to the prisoner. "Is your name Bonacieux?" said he.

"Yes, Monsieur Officer," stammered the mercer, more dead than alive, "at
your service."

"Come in," said the officer.

And he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass. The latter obeyed
without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appeared to be
expected.

It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the walls furnished
with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there was already a
fire, although it was scarcely the end of the month of September. A
square table, covered with books and papers, upon which was unrolled an
immense plan of the city of La Rochelle, occupied the center of the
room.

Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of a haughty,
proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thin face, which was
made still longer by a ROYAL (or IMPERIAL, as it is now called),
surmounted by a pair of mustaches. Although this man was scarcely
thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair, mustaches, and royal, all
began to be gray. This man, except a sword, had all the appearance of a
soldier; and his buff boots, still slightly covered with dust, indicated
that he had been on horseback in the course of the day.

This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; not such as
he is now represented--broken down like an old man, suffering like a
martyr, his body bent, his voice failing, buried in a large armchair as
in an anticipated tomb; no longer living but by the strength of his
genius, and no longer maintaining the struggle with Europe but by the
eternal application of his thoughts--but such as he really was at this
period; that is to say, an active and gallant cavalier, already weak of
body, but sustained by that moral power which made of him one of the
most extraordinary men that ever lived, preparing, after having
supported the Duc de Nevers in his duchy of Mantua, after having taken
Nimes, Castres, and Uzes, to drive the English from the Isle of Re and
lay siege to La Rochelle.

At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it was impossible for
those who did not know his face to guess in whose presence they were.

The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes of the
personage we have just described were fixed upon him, and appeared to
wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past.

"Is this that Bonacieux?" asked he, after a moment of silence.

"Yes, monseigneur," replied the officer.

"That's well. Give me those papers, and leave us."

The officer took from the table the papers pointed out, gave them to him
who asked for them, bowed to the ground, and retired.

Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the
Bastille. From time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from
the writings, and plunged them like poniards into the heart of the poor
mercer.

At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination, the
cardinal was satisfied.

"That head has never conspired," murmured he, "but it matters not; we
will see."

"You are accused of high treason," said the cardinal, slowly.

"So I have been told already, monseigneur," cried Bonacieux, giving his
interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him, "but I swear
to you that I know nothing about it."

The cardinal repressed a smile.

"You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, and with
my Lord Duke of Buckingham."

"Indeed, monseigneur," responded the mercer, "I have heard her pronounce
all those names."

"And on what occasion?"

"She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke of
Buckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen."

"She said that?" cried the cardinal, with violence.

"Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk about such
things; and that his Eminence was incapable--"

"Hold your tongue! You are stupid," replied the cardinal.

"That's exactly what my wife said, monseigneur."

"Do you know who carried off your wife?"

"No, monseigneur."

"You have suspicions, nevertheless?"

"Yes, monseigneur; but these suspicions appeared to be disagreeable to
Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have them."

"Your wife has escaped. Did you know that?"

"No, monseigneur. I learned it since I have been in prison, and that
from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary--an amiable man."

The cardinal repressed another smile.

"Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her
flight."

"Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to the
Louvre."

"At one o'clock this morning she had not returned."

"My God! What can have become of her, then?"

"We shall know, be assured. Nothing is concealed from the cardinal; the
cardinal knows everything."

"In that case, monseigneur, do you believe the cardinal will be so kind
as to tell me what has become of my wife?"

"Perhaps he may; but you must, in the first place, reveal to the
cardinal all you know of your wife's relations with Madame de
Chevreuse."

"But, monseigneur, I know nothing about them; I have never seen her."

"When you went to fetch your wife from the Louvre, did you always return
directly home?"

"Scarcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers, to
whose houses I conducted her."

"And how many were there of these linen drapers?"

"Two, monseigneur."

"And where did they live?"

"One in Rue de Vaugirard, the other Rue de la Harpe."

"Did you go into these houses with her?"

"Never, monseigneur; I waited at the door."

"And what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?"

"She gave me none; she told me to wait, and I waited."

"You are a very complacent husband, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux," said
the cardinal.

"He calls me his dear Monsieur," said the mercer to himself. "PESTE!
Matters are going all right."

"Should you know those doors again?"

"Yes."

"Do you know the numbers?"

"Yes."

"What are they?"

"No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe."

"That's well," said the cardinal.

At these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officer
entered.

"Go," said he, in a subdued voice, "and find Rochefort. Tell him to come
to me immediately, if he has returned."

"The count is here," said the officer, "and requests to speak with your
Eminence instantly."

"Let him come in, then!" said the cardinal, quickly.

The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which all the
servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him.

"To your Eminence!" murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round in
astonishment.

Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the
officer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered.

"It is he!" cried Bonacieux.

"He! What he?" asked the cardinal.

"The man who abducted my wife."

The cardinal rang a second time. The officer reappeared.

"Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him wait till I
send for him."

"No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!" cried Bonacieux; "no, I was
deceived. This is quite another man, and does not resemble him at all.
Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man."

"Take away that fool!" said the cardinal.

The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into the antechamber,
where he found his two guards.

The newly introduced personage followed Bonacieux impatiently with his
eyes till he had gone out; and the moment the door closed, "They have
seen each other;" said he, approaching the cardinal eagerly.

"Who?" asked his Eminence.

"He and she."

"The queen and the duke?" cried Richelieu.

"Yes."

"Where?"

"At the Louvre."

"Are you sure of it?"

"Perfectly sure."

"Who told you of it?"

"Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know."

"Why did she not let me know sooner?"

"Whether by chance or mistrust, the queen made Madame de Surgis sleep in
her chamber, and detained her all day."

"Well, we are beaten! Now let us try to take our revenge."

"I will assist you with all my heart, monseigneur; be assured of that."

"How did it come about?"

"At half past twelve the queen was with her women--"

"Where?"

"In her bedchamber--"

"Go on."

"When someone came and brought her a handkerchief from her laundress."

"And then?"

"The queen immediately exhibited strong emotion; and despite the rouge
with which her face was covered evidently turned pale--"

"And then, and then?"

"She then arose, and with altered voice, 'Ladies,' said she, 'wait for
me ten minutes, I shall soon return.' She then opened the door of her
alcove, and went out."

"Why did not Madame de Lannoy come and inform you instantly?"

"Nothing was certain; besides, her Majesty had said, 'Ladies, wait for
me,' and she did not dare to disobey the queen."

"How long did the queen remain out of the chamber?"

"Three-quarters of an hour."

"None of her women accompanied her?"

"Only Donna Estafania."

"Did she afterward return?"

"Yes; but only to take a little rosewood casket, with her cipher upon
it, and went out again immediately."

"And when she finally returned, did she bring that casket with her?"

"No."

"Does Madame de Lannoy know what was in that casket?"

"Yes; the diamond studs which his Majesty gave the queen."

"And she came back without this casket?"

"Yes."

"Madame de Lannoy, then, is of opinion that she gave them to
Buckingham?"

"She is sure of it."

"How can she be so?"

"In the course of the day Madame de Lannoy, in her quality of tire-woman
of the queen, looked for this casket, appeared uneasy at not finding it,
and at length asked information of the queen."

"And then the queen?"

"The queen became exceedingly red, and replied that having in the
evening broken one of those studs, she had sent it to her goldsmith to
be repaired."

"He must be called upon, and so ascertain if the thing be true or not."

"I have just been with him."

"And the goldsmith?"

"The goldsmith has heard nothing of it."

"Well, well! Rochefort, all is not lost; and perhaps--perhaps everything
is for the best."

"The fact is that I do not doubt your Eminence's genius--"

"Will repair the blunders of his agent--is that it?"

"That is exactly what I was going to say, if your Eminence had let me
finish my sentence."

"Meanwhile, do you know where the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of
Buckingham are now concealed?"

"No, monseigneur; my people could tell me nothing on that head."

"But I know."

"You, monseigneur?"

"Yes; or at least I guess. They were, one in the Rue de Vaugirard, No.
25; the other in the Rue de la Harpe, No. 75."

"Does your Eminence command that they both be instantly arrested?"

"It will be too late; they will be gone."

"But still, we can make sure that they are so."

"Take ten men of my Guardsmen, and search the two houses thoroughly."

"Instantly, monseigneur." And Rochefort went hastily out of the
apartment.

The cardinal, being left alone, reflected for an instant and then rang
the bell a third time. The same officer appeared.

"Bring the prisoner in again," said the cardinal.

M Bonacieux was introduced afresh, and upon a sign from the cardinal,
the officer retired.

"You have deceived me!" said the cardinal, sternly.

"I," cried Bonacieux, "I deceive your Eminence!"

"Your wife, in going to Rue de Vaugirard and Rue de la Harpe, did not go
to find linen drapers."

"Then why did she go, just God?"

"She went to meet the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of Buckingham."

"Yes," cried Bonacieux, recalling all his remembrances of the
circumstances, "yes, that's it. Your Eminence is right. I told my wife
several times that it was surprising that linen drapers should live in
such houses as those, in houses that had no signs; but she always
laughed at me. Ah, monseigneur!" continued Bonacieux, throwing himself
at his Eminence's feet, "ah, how truly you are the cardinal, the great
cardinal, the man of genius whom all the world reveres!"

The cardinal, however contemptible might be the triumph gained over so
vulgar a being as Bonacieux, did not the less enjoy it for an instant;
then, almost immediately, as if a fresh thought has occurred, a smile
played upon his lips, and he said, offering his hand to the mercer,
"Rise, my friend, you are a worthy man."

"The cardinal has touched me with his hand! I have touched the hand of
the great man!" cried Bonacieux. "The great man has called me his
friend!"

"Yes, my friend, yes," said the cardinal, with that paternal tone which
he sometimes knew how to assume, but which deceived none who knew him;
"and as you have been unjustly suspected, well, you must be indemnified.
Here, take this purse of a hundred pistoles, and pardon me."

"I pardon you, monseigneur!" said Bonacieux, hesitating to take the
purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a
pleasantry. "But you are able to have me arrested, you are able to have
me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are the master, and I
could not have the least word to say. Pardon you, monseigneur! You
cannot mean that!"

"Ah, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, you are generous in this matter. I see
it and I thank you for it. Thus, then, you will take this bag, and you
will go away without being too malcontent."

"I go away enchanted."

"Farewell, then, or rather, AU REVOIR!"

"Whenever Monseigneur wishes, I shall be firmly at the orders of his
Eminence."

"That will be often, be assured, for I have found your conversation
quite charming."

"Oh! Monseigneur!"

"AU REVOIR, Monsieur Bonacieux, AU REVOIR."

And the cardinal made him a sign with his hand, to which Bonacieux
replied by bowing to the ground. He then went out backward, and when he
was in the antechamber the cardinal heard him, in his enthusiasm, crying
aloud, "Long life to the Monseigneur! Long life to his Eminence! Long
life to the great cardinal!" The cardinal listened with a smile to this
vociferous manifestation of the feelings of M. Bonacieux; and then, when
Bonacieux's cries were no longer audible, "Good!" said he, "that man
would henceforward lay down his life for me." And the cardinal began to
examine with the greatest attention the map of La Rochelle, which, as we
have said, lay open on the desk, tracing with a pencil the line in which
the famous dyke was to pass which, eighteen months later, shut up the
port of the besieged city. As he was in the deepest of his strategic
meditations, the door opened, and Rochefort returned.

"Well?" said the cardinal, eagerly, rising with a promptitude which
proved the degree of importance he attached to the commission with which
he had charged the count.

"Well," said the latter, "a young woman of about twenty-six or
twenty-eight years of age, and a man of from thirty-five to forty, have
indeed lodged at the two houses pointed out by your Eminence; but the
woman left last night, and the man this morning."

"It was they!" cried the cardinal, looking at the clock; "and now it is
too late to have them pursued. The duchess is at Tours, and the duke at
Boulogne. It is in London they must be found."

"What are your Eminence's orders?"

"Not a word of what has passed. Let the queen remain in perfect
security; let her be ignorant that we know her secret. Let her believe
that we are in search of some conspiracy or other. Send me the keeper of
the seals, Seguier."

"And that man, what has your Eminence done with him?"

"What man?" asked the cardinal.

"That Bonacieux."

"I have done with him all that could be done. I have made him a spy upon
his wife."

The Comte de Rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the superiority
of the master as great, and retired.

Left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter, which
he secured with his special seal. Then he rang. The officer entered for
the fourth time.

"Tell Vitray to come to me," said he, "and tell him to get ready for a
journey."

An instant after, the man he asked for was before him, booted and
spurred.

"Vitray," said he, "you will go with all speed to London. You must not
stop an instant on the way. You will deliver this letter to Milady. Here
is an order for two hundred pistoles; call upon my treasurer and get the
money. You shall have as much again if you are back within six days, and
have executed your commission well."

The messenger, without replying a single word, bowed, took the letter,
with the order for the two hundred pistoles, and retired.

Here is what the letter contained:

MILADY, Be at the first ball at which the Duke of Buckingham shall be
present. He will wear on his doublet twelve diamond studs; get as near
to him as you can, and cut off two.

As soon as these studs shall be in your possession, inform me.





15 MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD


On the day after these events had taken place, Athos not having
reappeared, M. de Treville was informed by d'Artagnan and Porthos of the
circumstance. As to Aramis, he had asked for leave of absence for five
days, and was gone, it was said, to Rouen on family business.

M de Treville was the father of his soldiers. The lowest or the least
known of them, as soon as he assumed the uniform of the company, was as
sure of his aid and support as if he had been his own brother.

He repaired, then, instantly to the office of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL.
The officer who commanded the post of the Red Cross was sent for, and by
successive inquiries they learned that Athos was then lodged in Fort
l'Eveque.

Athos had passed through all the examinations we have seen Bonacieux
undergo.

We were present at the scene in which the two captives were confronted
with each other. Athos, who had till that time said nothing for fear
that d'Artagnan, interrupted in his turn, should not have the time
necessary, from this moment declared that his name was Athos, and not
d'Artagnan. He added that he did not know either M. or Mme. Bonacieux;
that he had never spoken to the one or the other; that he had come, at
about ten o'clock in the evening, to pay a visit to his friend M.
d'Artagnan, but that till that hour he had been at M. de Treville's,
where he had dined. "Twenty witnesses," added he, "could attest the
fact"; and he named several distinguished gentlemen, and among them was
M. le Duc de la Tremouille.

The second commissary was as much bewildered as the first had been by
the simple and firm declaration of the Musketeer, upon whom he was
anxious to take the revenge which men of the robe like at all times to
gain over men of the sword; but the name of M. de Treville, and that of
M. de la Tremouille, commanded a little reflection.

Athos was then sent to the cardinal; but unfortunately the cardinal was
at the Louvre with the king.

It was precisely at this moment that M. de Treville, on leaving the
residence of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL and the governor of Fort l'Eveque
without being able to find Athos, arrived at the palace.

As captain of the Musketeers, M. de Treville had the right of entry at
all times.

It is well known how violent the king's prejudices were against the
queen, and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by the cardinal,
who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely more than men.
One of the grand causes of this prejudice was the friendship of Anne of
Austria for Mme. de Chevreuse. These two women gave him more uneasiness
than the war with Spain, the quarrel with England, or the embarrassment
of the finances. In his eyes and to his conviction, Mme. de Chevreuse
not only served the queen in her political intrigues, but, what
tormented him still more, in her amorous intrigues.

At the first word the cardinal spoke of Mme. de Chevreuse--who, though
exiled to Tours and believed to be in that city, had come to Paris,
remained there five days, and outwitted the police--the king flew into a
furious passion. Capricious and unfaithful, the king wished to be called
Louis the Just and Louis the Chaste. Posterity will find a difficulty in
understanding this character, which history explains only by facts and
never by reason.

But when the cardinal added that not only Mme. de Chevreuse had been in
Paris, but still further, that the queen had renewed with her one of
those mysterious correspondences which at that time was named a CABAL;
when he affirmed that he, the cardinal, was about to unravel the most
closely twisted thread of this intrigue; that at the moment of arresting
in the very act, with all the proofs about her, the queen's emissary to
the exiled duchess, a Musketeer had dared to interrupt the course of
justice violently, by falling sword in hand upon the honest men of the
law, charged with investigating impartially the whole affair in order to
place it before the eyes of the king--Louis XIII could not contain
himself, and he made a step toward the queen's apartment with that pale
and mute indignation which, when it broke out, led this prince to the
commission of the most pitiless cruelty. And yet, in all this, the
cardinal had not yet said a word about the Duke of Buckingham.

At this instant M. de Treville entered, cool, polite, and in
irreproachable costume.

Informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal and the
alteration in the king's countenance, M. de Treville felt himself
something like Samson before the Philistines.

Louis XIII had already placed his hand on the knob of the door; at the
noise of M. de Treville's entrance he turned round. "You arrive in good
time, monsieur," said the king, who, when his passions were raised to a
certain point, could not dissemble; "I have learned some fine things
concerning your Musketeers."

"And I," said Treville, coldly, "I have some pretty things to tell your
Majesty concerning these gownsmen."

"What?" said the king, with hauteur.

"I have the honor to inform your Majesty," continued M. de Treville, in
the same tone, "that a party of PROCUREURS, commissaries, and men of the
police--very estimable people, but very inveterate, as it appears,
against the uniform--have taken upon themselves to arrest in a house, to
lead away through the open street, and throw into Fort l'Eveque, all
upon an order which they have refused to show me, one of my, or rather
your Musketeers, sire, of irreproachable conduct, of an almost
illustrious reputation, and whom your Majesty knows favorably, Monsieur
Athos."

"Athos," said the king, mechanically; "yes, certainly I know that name."

"Let your Majesty remember," said Treville, "that Monsieur Athos is the
Musketeer who, in the annoying duel which you are acquainted with, had
the misfortune to wound Monsieur de Cahusac so seriously. A PROPOS,
monseigneur," continued Treville, addressing the cardinal, "Monsieur de
Cahusac is quite recovered, is he not?"

"Thank you," said the cardinal, biting his lips with anger.

"Athos, then, went to pay a visit to one of his friends absent at the
time," continued Treville, "to a young Bearnais, a cadet in his
Majesty's Guards, the company of Monsieur Dessessart, but scarcely had
he arrived at his friend's and taken up a book, while waiting his
return, when a mixed crowd of bailiffs and soldiers came and laid siege
to the house, broke open several doors--"

The cardinal made the king a sign, which signified, "That was on account
of the affair about which I spoke to you."

"We all know that," interrupted the king; "for all that was done for our
service."

"Then," said Treville, "it was also for your Majesty's service that one
of my Musketeers, who was innocent, has been seized, that he has been
placed between two guards like a malefactor, and that this gallant man,
who has ten times shed his blood in your Majesty's service and is ready
to shed it again, has been paraded through the midst of an insolent
populace?"

"Bah!" said the king, who began to be shaken, "was it so managed?"

"Monsieur de Treville," said the cardinal, with the greatest phlegm,
"does not tell your Majesty that this innocent Musketeer, this gallant
man, had only an hour before attacked, sword in hand, four commissaries
of inquiry, who were delegated by myself to examine into an affair of
the highest importance."

"I defy your Eminence to prove it," cried Treville, with his Gascon
freedom and military frankness; "for one hour before, Monsieur Athos,
who, I will confide it to your Majesty, is really a man of the highest
quality, did me the honor after having dined with me to be conversing in
the saloon of my hotel, with the Duc de la Tremouille and the Comte de
Chalus, who happened to be there."

The king looked at the cardinal.

"A written examination attests it," said the cardinal, replying aloud to
the mute interrogation of his Majesty; "and the ill-treated people have
drawn up the following, which I have the honor to present to your
Majesty."

"And is the written report of the gownsmen to be placed in comparison
with the word of honor of a swordsman?" replied Treville haughtily.

"Come, come, Treville, hold your tongue," said the king.

"If his Eminence entertains any suspicion against one of my Musketeers,"
said Treville, "the justice of Monsieur the Cardinal is so well known
that I demand an inquiry."

"In the house in which the judicial inquiry was made," continued the
impassive cardinal, "there lodges, I believe, a young Bearnais, a friend
of the Musketeer."

"Your Eminence means Monsieur d'Artagnan."

"I mean a young man whom you patronize, Monsieur de Treville."

"Yes, your Eminence, it is the same."

"Do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel?"

"To Athos, to a man double his age?" interrupted Treville. "No,
monseigneur. Besides, d'Artagnan passed the evening with me."

"Well," said the cardinal, "everybody seems to have passed the evening
with you."

"Does your Eminence doubt my word?" said Treville, with a brow flushed
with anger.

"No, God forbid," said the cardinal; "only, at what hour was he with
you?"

"Oh, as to that I can speak positively, your Eminence; for as he came in
I remarked that it was but half past nine by the clock, although I had
believed it to be later."

"At what hour did he leave your hotel?"

"At half past ten--an hour after the event."

"Well," replied the cardinal, who could not for an instant suspect the
loyalty of Treville, and who felt that the victory was escaping him,
"well, but Athos WAS taken in the house in the Rue des Fossoyeurs."

"Is one friend forbidden to visit another, or a Musketeer of my company
to fraternize with a Guard of Dessessart's company?"

"Yes, when the house where he fraternizes is suspected."

"That house is suspected, Treville," said the king; "perhaps you did not
know it?"

"Indeed, sire, I did not. The house may be suspected; but I deny that it
is so in the part of it inhabited by Monsieur d'Artagnan, for I can
affirm, sire, if I can believe what he says, that there does not exist a
more devoted servant of your Majesty, or a more profound admirer of
Monsieur the Cardinal."

"Was it not this d'Artagnan who wounded Jussac one day, in that
unfortunate encounter which took place near the Convent of the
Carmes-Dechausses?" asked the king, looking at the cardinal, who colored
with vexation.

"And the next day, Bernajoux. Yes, sire, yes, it is the same; and your
Majesty has a good memory."

"Come, how shall we decide?" said the king.

"That concerns your Majesty more than me," said the cardinal. "I should
affirm the culpability."

"And I deny it," said Treville. "But his Majesty has judges, and these
judges will decide."

"That is best," said the king. "Send the case before the judges; it is
their business to judge, and they shall judge."

"Only," replied Treville, "it is a sad thing that in the unfortunate
times in which we live, the purest life, the most incontestable virtue,
cannot exempt a man from infamy and persecution. The army, I will answer
for it, will be but little pleased at being exposed to rigorous
treatment on account of police affairs."

The expression was imprudent; but M. de Treville launched it with
knowledge of his cause. He was desirous of an explosion, because in that
case the mine throws forth fire, and fire enlightens.

"Police affairs!" cried the king, taking up Treville's words, "police
affairs! And what do you know about them, Monsieur? Meddle with your
Musketeers, and do not annoy me in this way. It appears, according to
your account, that if by mischance a Musketeer is arrested, France is in
danger. What a noise about a Musketeer! I would arrest ten of them,
VENTREBLEU, a hundred, even, all the company, and I would not allow a
whisper."

"From the moment they are suspected by your Majesty," said Treville,
"the Musketeers are guilty; therefore, you see me prepared to surrender
my sword--for after having accused my soldiers, there can be no doubt
that Monsieur the Cardinal will end by accusing me. It is best to
constitute myself at once a prisoner with Athos, who is already
arrested, and with d'Artagnan, who most probably will be."

"Gascon-headed man, will you have done?" said the king.

"Sire," replied Treville, without lowering his voice in the least,
"either order my Musketeer to be restored to me, or let him be tried."

"He shall be tried," said the cardinal.

"Well, so much the better; for in that case I shall demand of his
Majesty permission to plead for him."

The king feared an outbreak.

"If his Eminence," said he, "did not have personal motives--"

The cardinal saw what the king was about to say and interrupted him:

"Pardon me," said he; "but the instant your Majesty considers me a
prejudiced judge, I withdraw."

"Come," said the king, "will you swear, by my father, that Athos was at
your residence during the event and that he took no part in it?"

"By your glorious father, and by yourself, whom I love and venerate
above all the world, I swear it."

"Be so kind as to reflect, sire," said the cardinal. "If we release the
prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth."

"Athos may always be found," replied Treville, "ready to answer, when it
shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him. He will not desert,
Monsieur the Cardinal, be assured of that; I will answer for him."

"No, he will not desert," said the king; "he can always be found, as
Treville says. Besides," added he, lowering his voice and looking with a
suppliant air at the cardinal, "let us give them apparent security; that
is policy."

This policy of Louis XIII made Richelieu smile.

"Order it as you please, sire; you possess the right of pardon."

"The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty," said Treville, who
was determined to have the last word, "and my Musketeer is innocent. It
is not mercy, then, that you are about to accord, sire, it is justice."

"And he is in the Fort l'Eveque?" said the king.

"Yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like the lowest
criminal."

"The devil!" murmured the king; "what must be done?"

"Sign an order for his release, and all will be said," replied the
cardinal. "I believe with your Majesty that Monsieur de Treville's
guarantee is more than sufficient."

Treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed with
fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the part of the
cardinal to this sudden yielding.

The king signed the order for release, and Treville carried it away
without delay. As he was about to leave the presence, the cardinal gave
him a friendly smile, and said, "A perfect harmony reigns, sire, between
the leaders and the soldiers of your Musketeers, which must be
profitable for the service and honorable to all."

"He will play me some dog's trick or other, and that immediately," said
Treville. "One has never the last word with such a man. But let us be
quick--the king may change his mind in an hour; and at all events it is
more difficult to replace a man in the Fort l'Eveque or the Bastille who
has got out, than to keep a prisoner there who is in."

M de Treville made his entrance triumphantly into the Fort l'Eveque,
whence he delivered the Musketeer, whose peaceful indifference had not
for a moment abandoned him.

The first time he saw d'Artagnan, "You have come off well," said he to
him; "there is your Jussac thrust paid for. There still remains that of
Bernajoux, but you must not be too confident."

As to the rest, M. de Treville had good reason to mistrust the cardinal
and to think that all was not over, for scarcely had the captain of the
Musketeers closed the door after him, than his Eminence said to the
king, "Now that we are at length by ourselves, we will, if your Majesty
pleases, converse seriously. Sire, Buckingham has been in Paris five
days, and only left this morning."





