52 CAPTIVITY: THE FIRST DAY


Let us return to Milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast of France
has made us lose sight of for an instant.

We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left her,
plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection--a dark hell at the gate of
which she has almost left hope behind, because for the first time she
doubts, for the first time she fears.

On two occasions her fortune has failed her, on two occasions she has
found herself discovered and betrayed; and on these two occasions it was
to one fatal genius, sent doubtlessly by the Lord to combat her, that
she has succumbed. D'Artagnan has conquered her--her, that invincible
power of evil.

He has deceived her in her love, humbled her in her pride, thwarted her
in her ambition; and now he ruins her fortune, deprives her of liberty,
and even threatens her life. Still more, he has lifted the corner of her
mask--that shield with which she covered herself and which rendered her
so strong.

D'Artagnan has turned aside from Buckingham, whom she hates as she hates
everyone she has loved, the tempest with which Richelieu threatened him
in the person of the queen. D'Artagnan had passed himself upon her as de
Wardes, for whom she had conceived one of those tigerlike fancies common
to women of her character. D'Artagnan knows that terrible secret which
she has sworn no one shall know without dying. In short, at the moment
in which she has just obtained from Richelieu a carte blanche by the
means of which she is about to take vengeance on her enemy, this
precious paper is torn from her hands, and it is d'Artagnan who holds
her prisoner and is about to send her to some filthy Botany Bay, some
infamous Tyburn of the Indian Ocean.

All this she owes to d'Artagnan, without doubt. From whom can come so
many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him? He alone could
have transmitted to Lord de Winter all these frightful secrets which he
has discovered, one after another, by a train of fatalities. He knows
her brother-in-law. He must have written to him.

What hatred she distills! Motionless, with her burning and fixed
glances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts of passion
which at times escape from the depths of her chest with her respiration,
accompany the sound of the surf which rises, growls, roars, and breaks
itself like an eternal and powerless despair against the rocks on which
is built this dark and lofty castle! How many magnificent projects of
vengeance she conceives by the light of the flashes which her
tempestuous passion casts over her mind against Mme. Bonacieux, against
Buckingham, but above all against d'Artagnan--projects lost in the
distance of the future.

Yes; but in order to avenge herself she must be free. And to be free, a
prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through a floor--all
undertakings which a patient and strong man may accomplish, but before
which the feverish irritations of a woman must give way. Besides, to do
all this, time is necessary--months, years; and she has ten or twelve
days, as Lord de Winter, her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told
her.

And yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, and perhaps might
succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake of placing that manlike
soul in that frail and delicate body?

The first moments of her captivity were terrible; a few convulsions of
rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of feminine weakness to
nature. But by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion;
and nervous tremblings which agitated her frame disappeared, and she
remained folded within herself like a fatigued serpent in repose.

"Go to, go to! I must have been mad to allow myself to be carried away
so," says she, gazing into the glass, which reflects back to her eyes
the burning glance by which she appears to interrogate herself. "No
violence; violence is the proof of weakness. In the first place, I have
never succeeded by that means. Perhaps if I employed my strength against
women I might perchance find them weaker than myself, and consequently
conquer them; but it is with men that I struggle, and I am but a woman
to them. Let me fight like a woman, then; my strength is in my
weakness."

Then, as if to render an account to herself of the changes she could
place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive, she made it
take all expressions from that of passionate anger, which convulsed her
features, to that of the most sweet, most affectionate, and most
seducing smile. Then her hair assumed successively, under her skillful
hands, all the undulations she thought might assist the charms of her
face. At length she murmured, satisfied with herself, "Come, nothing is
lost; I am still beautiful."

It was then nearly eight o'clock in the evening. Milady perceived a bed;
she calculated that the repose of a few hours would not only refresh her
head and her ideas, but still further, her complexion. A better idea,
however, came into her mind before going to bed. She had heard something
said about supper. She had already been an hour in this apartment; they
could not long delay bringing her a repast. The prisoner did not wish to
lose time; and she resolved to make that very evening some attempts to
ascertain the nature of the ground she had to work upon, by studying the
characters of the men to whose guardianship she was committed.

A light appeared under the door; this light announced the reappearance
of her jailers. Milady, who had arisen, threw herself quickly into the
armchair, her head thrown back, her beautiful hair unbound and
disheveled, her bosom half bare beneath her crumpled lace, one hand on
her heart, and the other hanging down.

The bolts were drawn; the door groaned upon its hinges. Steps sounded in
the chamber, and drew near.

"Place that table there," said a voice which the prisoner recognized as
that of Felton.

The order was executed.

"You will bring lights, and relieve the sentinel," continued Felton.

And this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the same
individuals proved to Milady that her servants were the same men as her
guards; that is to say, soldiers.

Felton's orders were, for the rest, executed with a silent rapidity that
gave a good idea of the way in which he maintained discipline.

At length Felton, who had not yet looked at Milady, turned toward her.

"Ah, ah!" said he, "she is asleep; that's well. When she wakes she can
sup." And he made some steps toward the door.

"But, my lieutenant," said a soldier, less stoical than his chief, and
who had approached Milady, "this woman is not asleep."

"What, not asleep!" said Felton; "what is she doing, then?"

"She has fainted. Her face is very pale, and I have listened in vain; I
do not hear her breathe."

"You are right," said Felton, after having looked at Milady from the
spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her. "Go and tell
Lord de Winter that his prisoner has fainted--for this event not having
been foreseen, I don't know what to do."

The soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer. Felton sat down
upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and waited without
speaking a word, without making a gesture. Milady possessed that great
art, so much studied by women, of looking through her long eyelashes
without appearing to open the lids. She perceived Felton, who sat with
his back toward her. She continued to look at him for nearly ten
minutes, and in these ten minutes the immovable guardian never turned
round once.

She then thought that Lord de Winter would come, and by his presence
give fresh strength to her jailer. Her first trial was lost; she acted
like a woman who reckons up her resources. As a result she raised her
head, opened her eyes, and sighed deeply.

At this sigh Felton turned round.

"Ah, you are awake, madame," he said; "then I have nothing more to do
here. If you want anything you can ring."

"Oh, my God, my God! how I have suffered!" said Milady, in that
harmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses, charmed
all whom she wished to destroy.

And she assumed, upon sitting up in the armchair, a still more graceful
and abandoned position than when she reclined.

Felton arose.

"You will be served, thus, madame, three times a day," said he. "In the
morning at nine o'clock, in the day at one o'clock, and in the evening
at eight. If that does not suit you, you can point out what other hours
you prefer, and in this respect your wishes will be complied with."

"But am I to remain always alone in this vast and dismal chamber?" asked
Milady.

"A woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will be tomorrow at
the castle, and will return as often as you desire her presence."

"I thank you, sir," replied the prisoner, humbly.

Felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door. At the
moment he was about to go out, Lord de Winter appeared in the corridor,
followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform him of the swoon of
Milady. He held a vial of salts in his hand.

"Well, what is it--what is going on here?" said he, in a jeering voice,
on seeing the prisoner sitting up and Felton about to go out. "Is this
corpse come to life already? Felton, my lad, did you not perceive that
you were taken for a novice, and that the first act was being performed
of a comedy of which we shall doubtless have the pleasure of following
out all the developments?"

"I thought so, my lord," said Felton; "but as the prisoner is a woman,
after all, I wish to pay her the attention that every man of gentle
birth owes to a woman, if not on her account, at least on my own."

Milady shuddered through her whole system. These words of Felton's
passed like ice through her veins.

"So," replied de Winter, laughing, "that beautiful hair so skillfully
disheveled, that white skin, and that languishing look, have not yet
seduced you, you heart of stone?"

"No, my Lord," replied the impassive young man; "your Lordship may be
assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetry of a woman to
corrupt me."

"In that case, my brave lieutenant, let us leave Milady to find out
something else, and go to supper; but be easy! She has a fruitful
imagination, and the second act of the comedy will not delay its steps
after the first."

And at these words Lord de Winter passed his arm through that of Felton,
and led him out, laughing.

"Oh, I will be a match for you!" murmured Milady, between her teeth; "be
assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poor converted soldier, who
has cut his uniform out of a monk's frock!"

"By the way," resumed de Winter, stopping at the threshold of the door,
"you must not, Milady, let this check take away your appetite. Taste
that fowl and those fish. On my honor, they are not poisoned. I have a
very good cook, and he is not to be my heir; I have full and perfect
confidence in him. Do as I do. Adieu, dear sister, till your next
swoon!"

This was all that Milady could endure. Her hands clutched her armchair;
she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed the motion of the door
as it closed behind Lord de Winter and Felton, and the moment she was
alone a fresh fit of despair seized her. She cast her eyes upon the
table, saw the glittering of a knife, rushed toward it and clutched it;
but her disappointment was cruel. The blade was round, and of flexible
silver.

A burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-closed
door, and the door reopened.

"Ha, ha!" cried Lord de Winter; "ha, ha! Don't you see, my brave Felton;
don't you see what I told you? That knife was for you, my lad; she would
have killed you. Observe, this is one of her peculiarities, to get rid
thus, after one fashion or another, of all the people who bother her. If
I had listened to you, the knife would have been pointed and of steel.
Then no more of Felton; she would have cut your throat, and after that
everybody else's. See, John, see how well she knows how to handle a
knife."

In fact, Milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenched hand; but
these last words, this supreme insult, relaxed her hands, her strength,
and even her will. The knife fell to the ground.

"You were right, my Lord," said Felton, with a tone of profound disgust
which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of Milady, "you were
right, my Lord, and I was wrong."

And both again left the room.

But this time Milady lent a more attentive ear than the first, and she
heard their steps die away in the distance of the corridor.

"I am lost," murmured she; "I am lost! I am in the power of men upon
whom I can have no more influence than upon statues of bronze or
granite; they know me by heart, and are steeled against all my weapons.
It is, however, impossible that this should end as they have decreed!"

In fact, as this last reflection indicated--this instinctive return to
hope--sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell long in her ardent
spirit. Milady sat down to table, ate from several dishes, drank a
little Spanish wine, and felt all her resolution return.

Before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on all sides,
examined on all points, the words, the steps, the gestures, the signs,
and even the silence of her interlocutors; and of this profound,
skillful, and anxious study the result was that Felton, everything
considered, appeared the more vulnerable of her two persecutors.

One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner: "If I had
listened to you," Lord de Winter had said to Felton.

Felton, then, had spoken in her favor, since Lord de Winter had not been
willing to listen to him.

"Weak or strong," repeated Milady, "that man has, then, a spark of pity
in his soul; of that spark I will make a flame that shall devour him. As
to the other, he knows me, he fears me, and knows what he has to expect
of me if ever I escape from his hands. It is useless, then, to attempt
anything with him. But Felton--that's another thing. He is a young,
ingenuous, pure man who seems virtuous; him there are means of
destroying."

And Milady went to bed and fell asleep with a smile upon her lips.
Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was a young girl
dreaming of the crown of flowers she was to wear on her brow at the next
festival.





53 CAPTIVITY: THE SECOND DAY


Milady dreamed that she at length had d'Artagnan in her power, that she
was present at his execution; and it was the sight of his odious blood,
flowing beneath the ax of the headsman, which spread that charming smile
upon her lips.

She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.

In the morning, when they entered her chamber she was still in bed.
Felton remained in the corridor. He brought with him the woman of whom
he had spoken the evening before, and who had just arrived; this woman
entered, and approaching Milady's bed, offered her services.

Milady was habitually pale; her complexion might therefore deceive a
person who saw her for the first time.

"I am in a fever," said she; "I have not slept a single instant during
all this long night. I suffer horribly. Are you likely to be more humane
to me than others were yesterday? All I ask is permission to remain
abed."

"Would you like to have a physician called?" said the woman.

Felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.

Milady reflected that the more people she had around her the more she
would have to work upon, and Lord de Winter would redouble his watch.
Besides, the physician might declare the ailment feigned; and Milady,
after having lost the first trick, was not willing to lose the second.

"Go and fetch a physician?" said she. "What could be the good of that?
These gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a comedy; it
would be just the same today, no doubt--for since yesterday evening they
have had plenty of time to send for a doctor."

"Then," said Felton, who became impatient, "say yourself, madame, what
treatment you wish followed."

"Eh, how can I tell? My God! I know that I suffer, that's all. Give me
anything you like, it is of little consequence."

"Go and fetch Lord de Winter," said Felton, tired of these eternal
complaints.

"Oh, no, no!" cried Milady; "no, sir, do not call him, I conjure you. I
am well, I want nothing; do not call him."

She gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to this exclamation,
that Felton in spite of himself advanced some steps into the room.

"He has come!" thought Milady.

"Meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer," said Felton, "a physician
shall be sent for; and if you deceive us--well, it will be the worse for
you. But at least we shall not have to reproach ourselves with
anything."

Milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round upon her
pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.

Felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness; then,
seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he went out. The
woman followed him, and Lord de Winter did not appear.

"I fancy I begin to see my way," murmured Milady, with a savage joy,
burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody who might be
watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.

Two hours passed away.

"Now it is time that the malady should be over," said she; "let me rise,
and obtain some success this very day. I have but ten days, and this
evening two of them will be gone."

In the morning, when they entered Milady's chamber they had brought her
breakfast. Now, she thought, they could not long delay coming to clear
the table, and that Felton would then reappear.

Milady was not deceived. Felton reappeared, and without observing
whether Milady had or had not touched her repast, made a sign that the
table should be carried out of the room, it having been brought in ready
spread.

Felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.

Milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful, pale, and
resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.

Felton approached her, and said, "Lord de Winter, who is a Catholic,
like yourself, madame, thinking that the deprivation of the rites and
ceremonies of your church might be painful to you, has consented that
you should read every day the ordinary of your Mass; and here is a book
which contains the ritual."

At the manner in which Felton laid the book upon the little table near
which Milady was sitting, at the tone in which he pronounced the two
words, YOUR MASS, at the disdainful smile with which he accompanied
them, Milady raised her head, and looked more attentively at the
officer.

By that plain arrangement of the hair, by that costume of extreme
simplicity, by the brow polished like marble and as hard and
impenetrable, she recognized one of those gloomy Puritans she had so
often met, not only in the court of King James, but in that of the King
of France, where, in spite of the remembrance of the St. Bartholomew,
they sometimes came to seek refuge.

She then had one of those sudden inspirations which only people of
genius receive in great crises, in supreme moments which are to decide
their fortunes or their lives.

Those two words, YOUR MASS, and a simple glance cast upon Felton,
revealed to her all the importance of the reply she was about to make;
but with that rapidity of intelligence which was peculiar to her, this
reply, ready arranged, presented itself to her lips:

"I?" said she, with an accent of disdain in unison with that which she
had remarked in the voice of the young officer, "I, sir? MY MASS? Lord
de Winter, the corrupted Catholic, knows very well that I am not of his
religion, and this is a snare he wishes to lay for me!"

"And of what religion are you, then, madame?" asked Felton, with an
astonishment which in spite of the empire he held over himself he could
not entirely conceal.

"I will tell it," cried Milady, with a feigned exultation, "on the day
when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith."

The look of Felton revealed to Milady the full extent of the space she
had opened for herself by this single word.

The young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; his look alone
had spoken.

"I am in the hands of my enemies," continued she, with that tone of
enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the Puritans. "Well, let my
God save me, or let me perish for my God! That is the reply I beg you to
make to Lord de Winter. And as to this book," added she, pointing to the
manual with her finger but without touching it, as if she must be
contaminated by it, "you may carry it back and make use of it yourself,
for doubtless you are doubly the accomplice of Lord de Winter--the
accomplice in his persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies."

Felton made no reply, took the book with the same appearance of
repugnance which he had before manifested, and retired pensively.

Lord de Winter came toward five o'clock in the evening. Milady had had
time, during the whole day, to trace her plan of conduct. She received
him like a woman who had already recovered all her advantages.

"It appears," said the baron, seating himself in the armchair opposite
that occupied by Milady, and stretching out his legs carelessly upon the
hearth, "it appears we have made a little apostasy!"

"What do you mean, sir!"

"I mean to say that since we last met you have changed your religion.
You have not by chance married a Protestant for a third husband, have
you?"

"Explain yourself, my Lord," replied the prisoner, with majesty; "for
though I hear your words, I declare I do not understand them."

"Then you have no religion at all; I like that best," replied Lord de
Winter, laughing.

"Certainly that is most in accord with your own principles," replied
Milady, frigidly.

"Oh, I confess it is all the same to me."

"Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; your
debaucheries and crimes would vouch for it."

"What, you talk of debaucheries, Madame Messalina, Lady Macbeth! Either
I misunderstand you or you are very shameless!"

"You only speak thus because you are overheard," coolly replied Milady;
"and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmen against me."

"My jailers and my hangmen! Heyday, madame! you are taking a poetical
tone, and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedy this evening. As to
the rest, in eight days you will be where you ought to be, and my task
will be completed."

"Infamous task! impious task!" cried Milady, with the exultation of a
victim who provokes his judge.

"My word," said de Winter, rising, "I think the hussy is going mad!
Come, come, calm yourself, Madame Puritan, or I'll remove you to a
dungeon. It's my Spanish wine that has got into your head, is it not?
But never mind; that sort of intoxication is not dangerous, and will
have no bad effects."

And Lord de Winter retired swearing, which at that period was a very
knightly habit.

Felton was indeed behind the door, and had not lost one word of this
scene. Milady had guessed aright.

"Yes, go, go!" said she to her brother; "the effects ARE drawing near,
on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them until it is too
late to shun them."

Silence was re-established. Two hours passed away. Milady's supper was
brought in, and she was found deeply engaged in saying her prayers
aloud--prayers which she had learned of an old servant of her second
husband, a most austere Puritan. She appeared to be in ecstasy, and did
not pay the least attention to what was going on around her. Felton made
a sign that she should not be disturbed; and when all was arranged, he
went out quietly with the soldiers.

Milady knew she might be watched, so she continued her prayers to the
end; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on duty at her door
did not march with the same step, and seemed to listen. For the moment
she wished nothing better. She arose, came to the table, ate but little,
and drank only water.

An hour after, her table was cleared; but Milady remarked that this time
Felton did not accompany the soldiers. He feared, then, to see her too
often.

She turned toward the wall to smile--for there was in this smile such an
expression of triumph that this smile alone would have betrayed her.

She allowed, therefore, half an hour to pass away; and as at that moment
all was silence in the old castle, as nothing was heard but the eternal
murmur of the waves--that immense breaking of the ocean--with her pure,
harmonious, and powerful voice, she began the first couplet of the psalm
then in great favor with the Puritans:

"Thou leavest thy servants, Lord, To see if they be strong; But soon
thou dost afford Thy hand to lead them on."

These verses were not excellent--very far from it; but as it is well
known, the Puritans did not pique themselves upon their poetry.

While singing, Milady listened. The soldier on guard at her door
stopped, as if he had been changed into stone. Milady was then able to
judge of the effect she had produced.

Then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor and feeling. It
appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distance beneath the vaulted
roofs, and carried with them a magic charm to soften the hearts of her
jailers. It however likewise appeared that the soldier on duty--a
zealous Catholic, no doubt--shook off the charm, for through the door he
called: "Hold your tongue, madame! Your song is as dismal as a 'De
profundis'; and if besides the pleasure of being in garrison here, we
must hear such things as these, no mortal can hold out."

"Silence!" then exclaimed another stern voice which Milady recognized as
that of Felton. "What are you meddling with, stupid? Did anybody order
you to prevent that woman from singing? No. You were told to guard
her--to fire at her if she attempted to fly. Guard her! If she flies,
kill her; but don't exceed your orders."

An expression of unspeakable joy lightened the countenance of Milady;
but this expression was fleeting as the reflection of lightning. Without
appearing to have heard the dialogue, of which she had not lost a word,
she began again, giving to her voice all the charm, all the power, all
the seduction the demon had bestowed upon it:

"For all my tears, my cares, My exile, and my chains, I have my youth,
my prayers, And God, who counts my pains."

Her voice, of immense power and sublime expression, gave to the rude,
unpolished poetry of these psalms a magic and an effect which the most
exalted Puritans rarely found in the songs of their brethren, and which
they were forced to ornament with all the resources of their
imagination. Felton believed he heard the singing of the angel who
consoled the three Hebrews in the furnace.

Milady continued:

"One day our doors will ope, With God come our desire; And if betrays
that hope, To death we can aspire."

This verse, into which the terrible enchantress threw her whole soul,
completed the trouble which had seized the heart of the young officer.
He opened the door quickly; and Milady saw him appear, pale as usual,
but with his eye inflamed and almost wild.

"Why do you sing thus, and with such a voice?" said he.

"Your pardon, sir," said Milady, with mildness. "I forgot that my songs
are out of place in this castle. I have perhaps offended you in your
creed; but it was without wishing to do so, I swear. Pardon me, then, a
fault which is perhaps great, but which certainly was involuntary."

Milady was so beautiful at this moment, the religious ecstasy in which
she appeared to be plunged gave such an expression to her countenance,
that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheld the angel whom he
had only just before heard.

"Yes, yes," said he; "you disturb, you agitate the people who live in
the castle."

The poor, senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence of his
words, while Milady was reading with her lynx's eyes the very depths of
his heart.

"I will be silent, then," said Milady, casting down her eyes with all
the sweetness she could give to her voice, with all the resignation she
could impress upon her manner.

"No, no, madame," said Felton, "only do not sing so loud, particularly
at night."

And at these words Felton, feeling that he could not long maintain his
severity toward his prisoner, rushed out of the room.

"You have done right, Lieutenant," said the soldier. "Such songs disturb
the mind; and yet we become accustomed to them, her voice is so
beautiful."





54 CAPTIVITY: THE THIRD DAY


Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken. He must
be retained, or rather he must be left quite alone; and Milady but
obscurely perceived the means which could lead to this result.

Still more must be done. He must be made to speak, in order that he
might be spoken to--for Milady very well knew that her greatest
seduction was in her voice, which so skillfully ran over the whole gamut
of tones from human speech to language celestial.

Yet in spite of all this seduction Milady might fail--for Felton was
forewarned, and that against the least chance. From that moment she
watched all his actions, all his words, from the simplest glance of his
eyes to his gestures--even to a breath that could be interpreted as a
sigh. In short, she studied everything, as a skillful comedian does to
whom a new part has been assigned in a line to which he is not
accustomed.

Face to face with Lord de Winter her plan of conduct was more easy. She
had laid that down the preceding evening. To remain silent and dignified
in his presence; from time to time to irritate him by affected disdain,
by a contemptuous word; to provoke him to threats and violence which
would produce a contrast with her own resignation--such was her plan.
Felton would see all; perhaps he would say nothing, but he would see.

In the morning, Felton came as usual; but Milady allowed him to preside
over all the preparations for breakfast without addressing a word to
him. At the moment when he was about to retire, she was cheered with a
ray of hope, for she thought he was about to speak; but his lips moved
without any sound leaving his mouth, and making a powerful effort to
control himself, he sent back to his heart the words that were about to
escape from his lips, and went out. Toward midday, Lord de Winter
entered.

It was a tolerably fine winter's day, and a ray of that pale English sun
which lights but does not warm came through the bars of her prison.

Milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hear the door
as it opened.

"Ah, ah!" said Lord de Winter, "after having played comedy, after having
played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?"

The prisoner made no reply.

"Yes, yes," continued Lord de Winter, "I understand. You would like very
well to be at liberty on that beach! You would like very well to be in a
good ship dancing upon the waves of that emerald-green sea; you would
like very well, either on land or on the ocean, to lay for me one of
those nice little ambuscades you are so skillful in planning. Patience,
patience! In four days' time the shore will be beneath your feet, the
sea will be open to you--more open than will perhaps be agreeable to
you, for in four days England will be relieved of you."

Milady folded her hands, and raising her fine eyes toward heaven, "Lord,
Lord," said she, with an angelic meekness of gesture and tone, "pardon
this man, as I myself pardon him."

"Yes, pray, accursed woman!" cried the baron; "your prayer is so much
the more generous from your being, I swear to you, in the power of a man
who will never pardon you!" and he went out.

At the moment he went out a piercing glance darted through the opening
of the nearly closed door, and she perceived Felton, who drew quickly to
one side to prevent being seen by her.

Then she threw herself upon her knees, and began to pray.

"My God, my God!" said she, "thou knowest in what holy cause I suffer;
give me, then, strength to suffer."

The door opened gently; the beautiful supplicant pretended not to hear
the noise, and in a voice broken by tears, she continued:

"God of vengeance! God of goodness! wilt thou allow the frightful
projects of this man to be accomplished?"

Then only she pretended to hear the sound of Felton's steps, and rising
quick as thought, she blushed, as if ashamed of being surprised on her
knees.

"I do not like to disturb those who pray, madame," said Felton,
seriously; "do not disturb yourself on my account, I beseech you."

"How do you know I was praying, sir?" said Milady, in a voice broken by
sobs. "You were deceived, sir; I was not praying."

"Do you think, then, madame," replied Felton, in the same serious voice,
but with a milder tone, "do you think I assume the right of preventing a
creature from prostrating herself before her Creator? God forbid!
Besides, repentance becomes the guilty; whatever crimes they may have
committed, for me the guilty are sacred at the feet of God!"

"Guilty? I?" said Milady, with a smile which might have disarmed the
angel of the last judgment. "Guilty? Oh, my God, thou knowest whether I
am guilty! Say I am condemned, sir, if you please; but you know that
God, who loves martyrs, sometimes permits the innocent to be condemned."

"Were you condemned, were you innocent, were you a martyr," replied
Felton, "the greater would be the necessity for prayer; and I myself
would aid you with my prayers."

"Oh, you are a just man!" cried Milady, throwing herself at his feet. "I
can hold out no longer, for I fear I shall be wanting in strength at the
moment when I shall be forced to undergo the struggle, and confess my
faith. Listen, then, to the supplication of a despairing woman. You are
abused, sir; but that is not the question. I only ask you one favor; and
if you grant it me, I will bless you in this world and in the next."

"Speak to the master, madame," said Felton; "happily I am neither
charged with the power of pardoning nor punishing. It is upon one higher
placed than I am that God has laid this responsibility."

"To you--no, to you alone! Listen to me, rather than add to my
destruction, rather than add to my ignominy!"

"If you have merited this shame, madame, if you have incurred this
ignominy, you must submit to it as an offering to God."

"What do you say? Oh, you do not understand me! When I speak of
ignominy, you think I speak of some chastisement, of imprisonment or
death. Would to heaven! Of what consequence to me is imprisonment or
death?"

"It is I who no longer understand you, madame," said Felton.

"Or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!" replied the
prisoner, with a smile of incredulity.

"No, madame, on the honor of a soldier, on the faith of a Christian."

"What, you are ignorant of Lord de Winter's designs upon me?"

"I am."

"Impossible; you are his confidant!"

"I never lie, madame."

"Oh, he conceals them too little for you not to divine them."

"I seek to divine nothing, madame; I wait till I am confided in, and
apart from that which Lord de Winter has said to me before you, he has
confided nothing to me."

"Why, then," cried Milady, with an incredible tone of truthfulness, "you
are not his accomplice; you do not know that he destines me to a
disgrace which all the punishments of the world cannot equal in horror?"

"You are deceived, madame," said Felton, blushing; "Lord de Winter is
not capable of such a crime."

"Good," said Milady to herself; "without thinking what it is, he calls
it a crime!" Then aloud, "The friend of THAT WRETCH is capable of
everything."

"Whom do you call 'that wretch'?" asked Felton.

"Are there, then, in England two men to whom such an epithet can be
applied?"

"You mean George Villiers?" asked Felton, whose looks became excited.

"Whom Pagans and unbelieving Gentiles call Duke of Buckingham," replied
Milady. "I could not have thought that there was an Englishman in all
England who would have required so long an explanation to make him
understand of whom I was speaking."

"The hand of the Lord is stretched over him," said Felton; "he will not
escape the chastisement he deserves."

Felton only expressed, with regard to the duke, the feeling of
execration which all the English had declared toward him whom the
Catholics themselves called the extortioner, the pillager, the
debauchee, and whom the Puritans styled simply Satan.

"Oh, my God, my God!" cried Milady; "when I supplicate thee to pour upon
this man the chastisement which is his due, thou knowest it is not my
own vengeance I pursue, but the deliverance of a whole nation that I
implore!"

"Do you know him, then?" asked Felton.

"At length he interrogates me!" said Milady to herself, at the height of
joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result. "Oh, know him?
Yes, yes! to my misfortune, to my eternal misfortune!" and Milady
twisted her arms as if in a paroxysm of grief.

Felton no doubt felt within himself that his strength was abandoning
him, and he made several steps toward the door; but the prisoner, whose
eye never left him, sprang in pursuit of him and stopped him.

"Sir," cried she, "be kind, be clement, listen to my prayer! That knife,
which the fatal prudence of the baron deprived me of, because he knows
the use I would make of it! Oh, hear me to the end! that knife, give it
to me for a minute only, for mercy's, for pity's sake! I will embrace
your knees! You shall shut the door that you may be certain I
contemplate no injury to you! My God! to you--the only just, good, and
compassionate being I have met with! To you--my preserver, perhaps! One
minute that knife, one minute, a single minute, and I will restore it to
you through the grating of the door. Only one minute, Mr. Felton, and
you will have saved my honor!"

"To kill yourself?" cried Felton, with terror, forgetting to withdraw
his hands from the hands of the prisoner, "to kill yourself?"

"I have told, sir," murmured Milady, lowering her voice, and allowing
herself to sink overpowered to the ground; "I have told my secret! He
knows all! My God, I am lost!"

Felton remained standing, motionless and undecided.

"He still doubts," thought Milady; "I have not been earnest enough."

Someone was heard in the corridor; Milady recognized the step of Lord de
Winter.

Felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.

Milady sprang toward him. "Oh, not a word," said she in a concentrated
voice, "not a word of all that I have said to you to this man, or I am
lost, and it would be you--you--"

Then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of being heard,
applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautiful hand to
Felton's mouth.

Felton gently repulsed Milady, and she sank into a chair.

Lord de Winter passed before the door without stopping, and they heard
the noise of his footsteps soon die away.

Felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his ear bent and
listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, he breathed like a
man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of the apartment.

"Ah!" said Milady, listening in her turn to the noise of Felton's steps,
which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of Lord de Winter; "at
length you are mine!"

Then her brow darkened. "If he tells the baron," said she, "I am
lost--for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not kill myself,
will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and he will discover
that all this despair is but acted."

She placed herself before the glass, and regarded herself attentively;
never had she appeared more beautiful.

"Oh, yes," said she, smiling, "but we won't tell him!"

In the evening Lord de Winter accompanied the supper.

"Sir," said Milady, "is your presence an indispensable accessory of my
captivity? Could you not spare me the increase of torture which your
visits cause me?"

"How, dear sister!" said Lord de Winter. "Did not you sentimentally
inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruel to me today, that
you came to England solely for the pleasure of seeing me at your ease,
an enjoyment of which you told me you so sensibly felt the deprivation
that you had risked everything for it--seasickness, tempest, captivity?
Well, here I am; be satisfied. Besides, this time, my visit has a
motive."

Milady trembled; she thought Felton had told all. Perhaps never in her
life had this woman, who had experienced so many opposite and powerful
emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.

She was seated. Lord de Winter took a chair, drew it toward her, and sat
down close beside her. Then taking a paper out of his pocket, he
unfolded it slowly.

"Here," said he, "I want to show you the kind of passport which I have
drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the rule of order in
the life I consent to leave you."

Then turning his eyes from Milady to the paper, he read: "'Order to
conduct--' The name is blank," interrupted Lord de Winter. "If you have
any preference you can point it out to me; and if it be not within a
thousand leagues of London, attention will be paid to your wishes. I
will begin again, then:

"'Order to conduct to--the person named Charlotte Backson, branded by
the justice of the kingdom of France, but liberated after chastisement.
She is to dwell in this place without ever going more than three leagues
from it. In case of any attempt to escape, the penalty of death is to be
applied. She will receive five shillings per day for lodging and food'".

"That order does not concern me," replied Milady, coldly, "since it
bears another name than mine."

"A name? Have you a name, then?"

"I bear that of your brother."

"Ay, but you are mistaken. My brother is only your second husband; and
your first is still living. Tell me his name, and I will put it in the
place of the name of Charlotte Backson. No? You will not? You are
silent? Well, then you must be registered as Charlotte Backson."

Milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer from
affectation, but from terror. She believed the order ready for
execution. She thought that Lord de Winter had hastened her departure;
she thought she was condemned to set off that very evening. Everything
in her mind was lost for an instant; when all at once she perceived that
no signature was attached to the order. The joy she felt at this
discovery was so great she could not conceal it.

"Yes, yes," said Lord de Winter, who perceived what was passing in her
mind; "yes, you look for the signature, and you say to yourself: 'All is
not lost, for that order is not signed. It is only shown to me to
terrify me, that's all.' You are mistaken. Tomorrow this order will be
sent to the Duke of Buckingham. The day after tomorrow it will return
signed by his hand and marked with his seal; and four-and-twenty hours
afterward I will answer for its being carried into execution. Adieu,
madame. That is all I had to say to you."

"And I reply to you, sir, that this abuse of power, this exile under a
fictitious name, are infamous!"

"Would you like better to be hanged in your true name, Milady? You know
that the English laws are inexorable on the abuse of marriage. Speak
freely. Although my name, or rather that of my brother, would be mixed
up with the affair, I will risk the scandal of a public trial to make
myself certain of getting rid of you."

Milady made no reply, but became as pale as a corpse.

"Oh, I see you prefer peregrination. That's well madame; and there is an
old proverb that says, 'Traveling trains youth.' My faith! you are not
wrong after all, and life is sweet. That's the reason why I take such
care you shall not deprive me of mine. There only remains, then, the
question of the five shillings to be settled. You think me rather
parsimonious, don't you? That's because I don't care to leave you the
means of corrupting your jailers. Besides, you will always have your
charms left to seduce them with. Employ them, if your check with regard
to Felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind."

"Felton has not told him," said Milady to herself. "Nothing is lost,
then."

"And now, madame, till I see you again! Tomorrow I will come and
announce to you the departure of my messenger."

Lord de Winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.

Milady breathed again. She had still four days before her. Four days
would quite suffice to complete the seduction of Felton.

A terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind. She thought that Lord de
Winter would perhaps send Felton himself to get the order signed by the
Duke of Buckingham. In that case Felton would escape her--for in order
to secure success, the magic of a continuous seduction was necessary.
Nevertheless, as we have said, one circumstance reassured her. Felton
had not spoken.

As she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of Lord de Winter,
she placed herself at the table and ate.

Then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her knees and
repeated her prayers aloud. As on the evening before, the soldier
stopped his march to listen to her.

Soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel, which
came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her door.

"It is he," said she. And she began the same religious chant which had
so strongly excited Felton the evening before.

But although her voice--sweet, full, and sonorous--vibrated as
harmoniously and as affectingly as ever, the door remained shut. It
appeared however to Milady that in one of the furtive glances she darted
from time to time at the grating of the door she thought she saw the
ardent eyes of the young man through the narrow opening. But whether
this was reality or vision, he had this time sufficient self-command not
to enter.

However, a few instants after she had finished her religious song,
Milady thought she heard a profound sigh. Then the same steps she had
heard approach slowly withdrew, as if with regret.





55 CAPTIVITY: THE FOURTH DAY


The next day, when Felton entered Milady's apartment he found her
standing, mounted upon a chair, holding in her hands a cord made by
means of torn cambric handkerchiefs, twisted into a kind of rope one
with another, and tied at the ends. At the noise Felton made in
entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and tried to conceal
behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand.

The young man was more pale than usual, and his eyes, reddened by want
of sleep, denoted that he had passed a feverish night. Nevertheless, his
brow was armed with a severity more austere than ever.

He advanced slowly toward Milady, who had seated herself, and taking an
end of the murderous rope which by neglect, or perhaps by design, she
allowed to be seen, "What is this, madame?" he asked coldly.

"That? Nothing," said Milady, smiling with that painful expression which
she knew so well how to give to her smile. "Ennui is the mortal enemy of
prisoners; I had ennui, and I amused myself with twisting that rope."

Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the apartment
before which he had found Milady standing in the armchair in which she
was now seated, and over her head he perceived a gilt-headed screw,
fixed in the wall for the purpose of hanging up clothes or weapons.

He started, and the prisoner saw that start--for though her eyes were
cast down, nothing escaped her.

"What were you doing on that armchair?" asked he.

"Of what consequence?" replied Milady.

"But," replied Felton, "I wish to know."

"Do not question me," said the prisoner; "you know that we who are true
Christians are forbidden to lie."

"Well, then," said Felton, "I will tell you what you were doing, or
rather what you meant to do; you were going to complete the fatal
project you cherish in your mind. Remember, madame, if our God forbids
falsehood, he much more severely condemns suicide."

"When God sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly, placed between
suicide and dishonor, believe me, sir," replied Milady, in a tone of
deep conviction, "God pardons suicide, for then suicide becomes
martyrdom."

"You say either too much or too little; speak, madame. In the name of
heaven, explain yourself."

"That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them as fables; that
I may tell you my projects for you to go and betray them to my
persecutor? No, sir. Besides, of what importance to you is the life or
death of a condemned wretch? You are only responsible for my body, is it
not so? And provided you produce a carcass that may be recognized as
mine, they will require no more of you; nay, perhaps you will even have
a double reward."

"I, madame, I?" cried Felton. "You suppose that I would ever accept the
price of your life? Oh, you cannot believe what you say!"

"Let me act as I please, Felton, let me act as I please," said Milady,
elated. "Every soldier must be ambitious, must he not? You are a
lieutenant? Well, you will follow me to the grave with the rank of
captain."

"What have I, then, done to you," said Felton, much agitated, "that you
should load me with such a responsibility before God and before men? In
a few days you will be away from this place; your life, madame, will
then no longer be under my care, and," added he, with a sigh, "then you
can do what you will with it."

"So," cried Milady, as if she could not resist giving utterance to a
holy indignation, "you, a pious man, you who are called a just man, you
ask but one thing--and that is that you may not be inculpated, annoyed,
by my death!"

"It is my duty to watch over your life, madame, and I will watch."

"But do you understand the mission you are fulfilling? Cruel enough, if
I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what name will the Lord give
it, if I am innocent?"

"I am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders I have received."

"Do you believe, then, that at the day of the Last Judgment God will
separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges? You are not willing
that I should kill my body, and you make yourself the agent of him who
would kill my soul."

"But I repeat it again to you," replied Felton, in great emotion, "no
danger threatens you; I will answer for Lord de Winter as for myself."

"Dunce," cried Milady, "dunce! who dares to answer for another man, when
the wisest, when those most after God's own heart, hesitate to answer
for themselves, and who ranges himself on the side of the strongest and
the most fortunate, to crush the weakest and the most unfortunate."

"Impossible, madame, impossible," murmured Felton, who felt to the
bottom of his heart the justness of this argument. "A prisoner, you will
not recover your liberty through me; living, you will not lose your life
through me."

"Yes," cried Milady, "but I shall lose that which is much dearer to me
than life, I shall lose my honor, Felton; and it is you, you whom I make
responsible, before God and before men, for my shame and my infamy."

This time Felton, immovable as he was, or appeared to be, could not
resist the secret influence which had already taken possession of him.
To see this woman, so beautiful, fair as the brightest vision, to see
her by turns overcome with grief and threatening; to resist at once the
ascendancy of grief and beauty--it was too much for a visionary; it was
too much for a brain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic faith;
it was too much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that burns,
by the hatred of men that devours.

Milady saw the trouble. She felt by intuition the flame of the opposing
passions which burned with the blood in the veins of the young fanatic.
As a skillful general, seeing the enemy ready to surrender, marches
toward him with a cry of victory, she rose, beautiful as an antique
priestess, inspired like a Christian virgin, her arms extended, her
throat uncovered, her hair disheveled, holding with one hand her robe
modestly drawn over her breast, her look illumined by that fire which
had already created such disorder in the veins of the young Puritan, and
went toward him, crying out with a vehement air, and in her melodious
voice, to which on this occasion she communicated a terrible energy:

"Let this victim to Baal be sent, To the lions the martyr be thrown! Thy
God shall teach thee to repent! From th' abyss he'll give ear to my
moan."

Felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified.

"Who art thou? Who art thou?" cried he, clasping his hands. "Art thou a
messenger from God; art thou a minister from hell; art thou an angel or
a demon; callest thou thyself Eloa or Astarte?"

"Do you not know me, Felton? I am neither an angel nor a demon; I am a
daughter of earth, I am a sister of thy faith, that is all."

"Yes, yes!" said Felton, "I doubted, but now I believe."

"You believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child of Belial
who is called Lord de Winter! You believe, and yet you leave me in the
hands of mine enemies, of the enemy of England, of the enemy of God! You
believe, and yet you deliver me up to him who fills and defiles the
world with his heresies and debaucheries--to that infamous Sardanapalus
whom the blind call the Duke of Buckingham, and whom believers name
Antichrist!"

"I deliver you up to Buckingham? I? what mean you by that?"

"They have eyes," cried Milady, "but they see not; ears have they, but
they hear not."

"Yes, yes!" said Felton, passing his hands over his brow, covered with
sweat, as if to remove his last doubt. "Yes, I recognize the voice which
speaks to me in my dreams; yes, I recognize the features of the angel
who appears to me every night, crying to my soul, which cannot sleep:
'Strike, save England, save thyself--for thou wilt die without having
appeased God!' Speak, speak!" cried Felton, "I can understand you now."

A flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from the eyes of
Milady.

However fugitive this homicide flash, Felton saw it, and started as if
its light had revealed the abysses of this woman's heart. He recalled,
all at once, the warnings of Lord de Winter, the seductions of Milady,
her first attempts after her arrival. He drew back a step, and hung down
his head, without, however, ceasing to look at her, as if, fascinated by
this strange creature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.

Milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this hesitation.
Under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never abandoned her. Before
Felton replied, and before she should be forced to resume this
conversation, so difficult to be sustained in the same exalted tone, she
let her hands fall; and as if the weakness of the woman overpowered the
enthusiasm of the inspired fanatic, she said: "But no, it is not for me
to be the Judith to deliver Bethulia from this Holofernes. The sword of
the eternal is too heavy for my arm. Allow me, then, to avoid dishonor
by death; let me take refuge in martyrdom. I do not ask you for liberty,
as a guilty one would, nor for vengeance, as would a pagan. Let me die;
that is all. I supplicate you, I implore you on my knees--let me die,
and my last sigh shall be a blessing for my preserver."

Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so timid
and downcast, Felton reproached himself. By degrees the enchantress had
clothed herself with that magic adornment which she assumed and threw
aside at will; that is to say, beauty, meekness, and tears--and above
all, the irresistible attraction of mystical voluptuousness, the most
devouring of all voluptuousness.

"Alas!" said Felton, "I can do but one thing, which is to pity you if
you prove to me you are a victim! But Lord de Winter makes cruel
accusations against you. You are a Christian; you are my sister in
religion. I feel myself drawn toward you--I, who have never loved anyone
but my benefactor--I who have met with nothing but traitors and impious
men. But you, madame, so beautiful in reality, you, so pure in
appearance, must have committed great iniquities for Lord de Winter to
pursue you thus."

"They have eyes," repeated Milady, with an accent of indescribable
grief, "but they see not; ears have they, but they hear not."

"But," cried the young officer, "speak, then, speak!"

"Confide my shame to you," cried Milady, with the blush of modesty upon
her countenance, "for often the crime of one becomes the shame of
another--confide my shame to you, a man, and I a woman? Oh," continued
she, placing her hand modestly over her beautiful eyes, "never!
never!--I could not!"

"To me, to a brother?" said Felton.

Milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the young
man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but observation, or
rather the wish to fascinate.

Felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands.

"Well, then," said Milady, "I confide in my brother; I will dare to--"

At this moment the steps of Lord de Winter were heard; but this time the
terrible brother-in-law of Milady did not content himself, as on the
preceding day, with passing before the door and going away again. He
paused, exchanged two words with the sentinel; then the door opened, and
he appeared.

During the exchange of these two words Felton drew back quickly, and
when Lord de Winter entered, he was several paces from the prisoner.

The baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance from Milady to
the young officer.

"You have been here a very long time, John," said he. "Has this woman
been relating her crimes to you? In that case I can comprehend the
length of the conversation."

Felton started; and Milady felt she was lost if she did not come to the
assistance of the disconcerted Puritan.

"Ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!" said she. "Well, ask your
worthy jailer what favor I this instant solicited of him."

"You demanded a favor?" said the baron, suspiciously.

"Yes, my Lord," replied the young man, confused.

"And what favor, pray?" asked Lord de Winter.

"A knife, which she would return to me through the grating of the door a
minute after she had received it," replied Felton.

"There is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiable lady
is desirous of cutting," said de Winter, in an ironical, contemptuous
tone.

"There is myself," replied Milady.

"I have given you the choice between America and Tyburn," replied Lord
de Winter. "Choose Tyburn, madame. Believe me, the cord is more certain
than the knife."

Felton grew pale, and made a step forward, remembering that at the
moment he entered Milady had a rope in her hand.

"You are right," said she, "I have often thought of it." Then she added
in a low voice, "And I will think of it again."

Felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones; probably Lord de
Winter perceived this emotion.

"Mistrust yourself, John," said he. "I have placed reliance upon you, my
friend. Beware! I have warned you! But be of good courage, my lad; in
three days we shall be delivered from this creature, and where I shall
send her she can harm nobody."

"You hear him!" cried Milady, with vehemence, so that the baron might
believe she was addressing heaven, and that Felton might understand she
was addressing him.

Felton lowered his head and reflected.

The baron took the young officer by the arm, and turned his head over
his shoulder, so as not to lose sight of Milady till he was gone out.

"Well," said the prisoner, when the door was shut, "I am not so far
advanced as I believed. De Winter has changed his usual stupidity into a
strange prudence. It is the desire of vengeance, and how desire molds a
man! As to Felton, he hesitates. Ah, he is not a man like that cursed
d'Artagnan. A Puritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by
clasping his hands. A Musketeer loves women, and he loves them by
clasping his arms round them."

Milady waited, then, with much impatience, for she feared the day would
pass away without her seeing Felton again. At last, in an hour after the
scene we have just described, she heard someone speaking in a low voice
at the door. Presently the door opened, and she perceived Felton.

The young man advanced rapidly into the chamber, leaving the door open
behind him, and making a sign to Milady to be silent; his face was much
agitated.

"What do you want with me?" said she.

"Listen," replied Felton, in a low voice. "I have just sent away the
sentinel that I might remain here without anybody knowing it, in order
to speak to you without being overheard. The baron has just related a
frightful story to me."

Milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim, and shook her head.

"Either you are a demon," continued Felton, "or the baron--my
benefactor, my father--is a monster. I have known you four days; I have
loved him four years. I therefore may hesitate between you. Be not
alarmed at what I say; I want to be convinced. Tonight, after twelve, I
will come and see you, and you shall convince me."

"No, Felton, no, my brother," said she; "the sacrifice is too great, and
I feel what it must cost you. No, I am lost; do not be lost with me. My
death will be much more eloquent than my life, and the silence of the
corpse will convince you much better than the words of the prisoner."

"Be silent, madame," cried Felton, "and do not speak to me thus; I came
to entreat you to promise me upon your honor, to swear to me by what you
hold most sacred, that you will make no attempt upon your life."

"I will not promise," said Milady, "for no one has more respect for a
promise or an oath than I have; and if I make a promise I must keep it."

"Well," said Felton, "only promise till you have seen me again. If, when
you have seen me again, you still persist--well, then you shall be free,
and I myself will give you the weapon you desire."

"Well," said Milady, "for you I will wait."

"Swear."

"I swear it, by our God. Are you satisfied?"

"Well," said Felton, "till tonight."

And he darted out of the room, shut the door, and waited in the
corridor, the soldier's half-pike in his hand, and as if he had mounted
guard in his place.

The soldier returned, and Felton gave him back his weapon.

Then, through the grating to which she had drawn near, Milady saw the
young man make a sign with delirious fervor, and depart in an apparent
transport of joy.

As for her, she returned to her place with a smile of savage contempt
upon her lips, and repeated, blaspheming, that terrible name of God, by
whom she had just sworn without ever having learned to know Him.

"My God," said she, "what a senseless fanatic! My God, it is I--I--and
this fellow who will help me to avenge myself."





56 CAPTIVITY: THE FIFTH DAY


Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubled her
forces.

It was not difficult to conquer, as she had hitherto done, men prompt to
let themselves be seduced, and whom the gallant education of a court led
quickly into her net. Milady was handsome enough not to find much
resistance on the part of the flesh, and she was sufficiently skillful
to prevail over all the obstacles of the mind.

But this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature, concentrated
and insensible by force of austerity. Religion and its observances had
made Felton a man inaccessible to ordinary seductions. There fermented
in that sublimated brain plans so vast, projects so tumultuous, that
there remained no room for any capricious or material love--that
sentiment which is fed by leisure and grows with corruption. Milady had,
then, made a breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horribly
prejudiced against her, and by her beauty in the heart of a man hitherto
chaste and pure. In short, she had taken the measure of motives hitherto
unknown to herself, through this experiment, made upon the most
rebellious subject that nature and religion could submit to her study.

Many a time, nevertheless, during the evening she despaired of fate and
of herself. She did not invoke God, we very well know, but she had faith
in the genius of evil--that immense sovereignty which reigns in all the
details of human life, and by which, as in the Arabian fable, a single
pomegranate seed is sufficient to reconstruct a ruined world.

Milady, being well prepared for the reception of Felton, was able to
erect her batteries for the next day. She knew she had only two days
left; that when once the order was signed by Buckingham--and Buckingham
would sign it the more readily from its bearing a false name, and he
could not, therefore, recognize the woman in question--once this order
was signed, we say, the baron would make her embark immediately, and she
knew very well that women condemned to exile employ arms much less
powerful in their seductions than the pretendedly virtuous woman whose
beauty is lighted by the sun of the world, whose style the voice of
fashion lauds, and whom a halo of aristocracy gilds with enchanting
splendors. To be a woman condemned to a painful and disgraceful
punishment is no impediment to beauty, but it is an obstacle to the
recovery of power. Like all persons of real genius, Milady knew what
suited her nature and her means. Poverty was repugnant to her;
degradation took away two-thirds of her greatness. Milady was only a
queen while among queens. The pleasure of satisfied pride was necessary
to her domination. To command inferior beings was rather a humiliation
than a pleasure for her.

She should certainly return from her exile--she did not doubt that a
single instant; but how long might this exile last? For an active,
ambitious nature, like that of Milady, days not spent in climbing are
inauspicious days. What word, then, can be found to describe the days
which they occupy in descending? To lose a year, two years, three years,
is to talk of an eternity; to return after the death or disgrace of the
cardinal, perhaps; to return when d'Artagnan and his friends, happy and
triumphant, should have received from the queen the reward they had well
acquired by the services they had rendered her--these were devouring
ideas that a woman like Milady could not endure. For the rest, the storm
which raged within her doubled her strength, and she would have burst
the walls of her prison if her body had been able to take for a single
instant the proportions of her mind.

Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all this was
the remembrance of the cardinal. What must the mistrustful, restless,
suspicious cardinal think of her silence--the cardinal, not merely her
only support, her only prop, her only protector at present, but still
further, the principal instrument of her future fortune and vengeance?
She knew him; she knew that at her return from a fruitless journey it
would be in vain to tell him of her imprisonment, in vain to enlarge
upon the sufferings she had undergone. The cardinal would reply, with
the sarcastic calmness of the skeptic, strong at once by power and
genius, "You should not have allowed yourself to be taken."

Then Milady collected all her energies, murmuring in the depths of her
soul the name of Felton--the only beam of light that penetrated to her
in the hell into which she had fallen; and like a serpent which folds
and unfolds its rings to ascertain its strength, she enveloped Felton
beforehand in the thousand meshes of her inventive imagination.

Time, however, passed away; the hours, one after another, seemed to
awaken the clock as they passed, and every blow of the brass hammer
resounded upon the heart of the prisoner. At nine o'clock, Lord de
Winter made his customary visit, examined the window and the bars,
sounded the floor and the walls, looked to the chimney and the doors,
without, during this long and minute examination, he or Milady
pronouncing a single word.

Doubtless both of them understood that the situation had become too
serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath.

"Well," said the baron, on leaving her "you will not escape tonight!"

At ten o'clock Felton came and placed the sentinel. Milady recognized
his step. She was as well acquainted with it now as a mistress is with
that of the lover of her heart; and yet Milady at the same time detested
and despised this weak fanatic.

That was not the appointed hour. Felton did not enter.

Two hours after, as midnight sounded, the sentinel was relieved. This
time it WAS the hour, and from this moment Milady waited with
impatience. The new sentinel commenced his walk in the corridor. At the
expiration of ten minutes Felton came.

Milady was all attention.

"Listen," said the young man to the sentinel. "On no pretense leave the
door, for you know that last night my Lord punished a soldier for having
quit his post for an instant, although I, during his absence, watched in
his place."

"Yes, I know it," said the soldier.

"I recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch. For my part I am
going to pay a second visit to this woman, who I fear entertains
sinister intentions upon her own life, and I have received orders to
watch her."

"Good!" murmured Milady; "the austere Puritan lies."

As to the soldier, he only smiled.

"Zounds, Lieutenant!" said he; "you are not unlucky in being charged
with such commissions, particularly if my Lord has authorized you to
look into her bed."

Felton blushed. Under any other circumstances he would have reprimanded
the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry, but his conscience
murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak.

"If I call, come," said he. "If anyone comes, call me."

"I will, Lieutenant," said the soldier.

Felton entered Milady's apartment. Milady arose.

"You are here!" said she.

"I promised to come," said Felton, "and I have come."

"You promised me something else."

"What, my God!" said the young man, who in spite of his self-command
felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow.

"You promised to bring a knife, and to leave it with me after our
interview."

"Say no more of that, madame," said Felton. "There is no situation,
however terrible it may be, which can authorize a creature of God to
inflict death upon himself. I have reflected, and I cannot, must not be
guilty of such a sin."

"Ah, you have reflected!" said the prisoner, sitting down in her
armchair, with a smile of disdain; "and I also have reflected."

"Upon what?"

"That I can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep his word."

"Oh, my God!" murmured Felton.

"You may retire," said Milady. "I will not talk."

"Here is the knife," said Felton, drawing from his pocket the weapon
which he had brought, according to his promise, but which he hesitated
to give to his prisoner.

"Let me see it," said Milady.

"For what purpose?"

"Upon my honor, I will instantly return it to you. You shall place it on
that table, and you may remain between it and me."

Felton offered the weapon to Milady, who examined the temper of it
attentively, and who tried the point on the tip of her finger.

"Well," said she, returning the knife to the young officer, "this is
fine and good steel. You are a faithful friend, Felton."

Felton took back the weapon, and laid it upon the table, as he had
agreed with the prisoner.

Milady followed him with her eyes, and made a gesture of satisfaction.

"Now," said she, "listen to me."

The request was needless. The young officer stood upright before her,
awaiting her words as if to devour them.

"Felton," said Milady, with a solemnity full of melancholy, "imagine
that your sister, the daughter of your father, speaks to you. While yet
young, unfortunately handsome, I was dragged into a snare. I resisted.
Ambushes and violences multiplied around me, but I resisted. The
religion I serve, the God I adore, were blasphemed because I called upon
that religion and that God, but still I resisted. Then outrages were
heaped upon me, and as my soul was not subdued they wished to defile my
body forever. Finally--"

Milady stopped, and a bitter smile passed over her lips.

"Finally," said Felton, "finally, what did they do?"

"At length, one evening my enemy resolved to paralyze the resistance he
could not conquer. One evening he mixed a powerful narcotic with my
water. Scarcely had I finished my repast, when I felt myself sink by
degrees into a strange torpor. Although I was without mistrust, a vague
fear seized me, and I tried to struggle against sleepiness. I arose. I
wished to run to the window and call for help, but my legs refused their
office. It appeared as if the ceiling sank upon my head and crushed me
with its weight. I stretched out my arms. I tried to speak. I could only
utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness came over me. I
supported myself by a chair, feeling that I was about to fall, but this
support was soon insufficient on account of my weak arms. I fell upon
one knee, then upon both. I tried to pray, but my tongue was frozen. God
doubtless neither heard nor saw me, and I sank upon the floor a prey to
a slumber which resembled death.

"Of all that passed in that sleep, or the time which glided away while
it lasted, I have no remembrance. The only thing I recollect is that I
awoke in bed in a round chamber, the furniture of which was sumptuous,
and into which light only penetrated by an opening in the ceiling. No
door gave entrance to the room. It might be called a magnificent prison.

"It was a long time before I was able to make out what place I was in,
or to take account of the details I describe. My mind appeared to strive
in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the sleep from which I could
not rouse myself. I had vague perceptions of space traversed, of the
rolling of a carriage, of a horrible dream in which my strength had
become exhausted; but all this was so dark and so indistinct in my mind
that these events seemed to belong to another life than mine, and yet
mixed with mine in fantastic duality.

"At times the state into which I had fallen appeared so strange that I
believed myself dreaming. I arose trembling. My clothes were near me on
a chair; I neither remembered having undressed myself nor going to bed.
Then by degrees the reality broke upon me, full of chaste terrors. I was
no longer in the house where I had dwelt. As well as I could judge by
the light of the sun, the day was already two-thirds gone. It was the
evening before when I had fallen asleep; my sleep, then, must have
lasted twenty-four hours! What had taken place during this long sleep?

"I dressed myself as quickly as possible; my slow and stiff motions all
attested that the effects of the narcotic were not yet entirely
dissipated. The chamber was evidently furnished for the reception of a
woman; and the most finished coquette could not have formed a wish, but
on casting her eyes about the apartment, she would have found that wish
accomplished.

"Certainly I was not the first captive that had been shut up in this
splendid prison; but you may easily comprehend, Felton, that the more
superb the prison, the greater was my terror.

"Yes, it was a prison, for I tried in vain to get out of it. I sounded
all the walls, in the hopes of discovering a door, but everywhere the
walls returned a full and flat sound.

"I made the tour of the room at least twenty times, in search of an
outlet of some kind; but there was none. I sank exhausted with fatigue
and terror into an armchair.

"Meantime, night came on rapidly, and with night my terrors increased. I
did not know but I had better remain where I was seated. It appeared
that I was surrounded with unknown dangers into which I was about to
fall at every instant. Although I had eaten nothing since the evening
before, my fears prevented my feeling hunger.

"No noise from without by which I could measure the time reached me; I
only supposed it must be seven or eight o'clock in the evening, for it
was in the month of October and it was quite dark.

"All at once the noise of a door, turning on its hinges, made me start.
A globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of the ceiling,
casting a strong light into my chamber; and I perceived with terror that
a man was standing within a few paces of me.

"A table, with two covers, bearing a supper ready prepared, stood, as if
by magic, in the middle of the apartment.

"That man was he who had pursued me during a whole year, who had vowed
my dishonor, and who, by the first words that issued from his mouth,
gave me to understand he had accomplished it the preceding night."

"Scoundrel!" murmured Felton.

"Oh, yes, scoundrel!" cried Milady, seeing the interest which the young
officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took in this strange
recital. "Oh, yes, scoundrel! He believed, having triumphed over me in
my sleep, that all was completed. He came, hoping that I would accept my
shame, as my shame was consummated; he came to offer his fortune in
exchange for my love.

"All that the heart of a woman could contain of haughty contempt and
disdainful words, I poured out upon this man. Doubtless he was
accustomed to such reproaches, for he listened to me calm and smiling,
with his arms crossed over his breast. Then, when he thought I had said
all, he advanced toward me; I sprang toward the table, I seized a knife,
I placed it to my breast.

"Take one step more," said I, "and in addition to my dishonor, you shall
have my death to reproach yourself with."

"There was, no doubt, in my look, my voice, my whole person, that
sincerity of gesture, of attitude, of accent, which carries conviction
to the most perverse minds, for he paused.

"'Your death?' said he; 'oh, no, you are too charming a mistress to
allow me to consent to lose you thus, after I have had the happiness to
possess you only a single time. Adieu, my charmer; I will wait to pay
you my next visit till you are in a better humor.'

"At these words he blew a whistle; the globe of fire which lighted the
room reascended and disappeared. I found myself again in complete
darkness. The same noise of a door opening and shutting was repeated the
instant afterward; the flaming globe descended afresh, and I was
completely alone.

"This moment was frightful; if I had any doubts as to my misfortune,
these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality. I was in the power
of a man whom I not only detested, but despised--of a man capable of
anything, and who had already given me a fatal proof of what he was able
to do."

"But who, then was this man?" asked Felton.

"I passed the night on a chair, starting at the least noise, for toward
midnight the lamp went out, and I was again in darkness. But the night
passed away without any fresh attempt on the part of my persecutor. Day
came; the table had disappeared, only I had still the knife in my hand.

"This knife was my only hope.

"I was worn out with fatigue. Sleeplessness inflamed my eyes; I had not
dared to sleep a single instant. The light of day reassured me; I went
and threw myself on the bed, without parting with the emancipating
knife, which I concealed under my pillow.

"When I awoke, a fresh meal was served.

"This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I began to
feel a devouring hunger. It was forty-eight hours since I had taken any
nourishment. I ate some bread and some fruit; then, remembering the
narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, I would not touch that which
was placed on the table, but filled my glass at a marble fountain fixed
in the wall over my dressing table.

"And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some time in
a terrible agitation of mind. But my fears were this time ill-founded; I
passed the day without experiencing anything of the kind I dreaded.

"I took the precaution to half empty the carafe, in order that my
suspicions might not be noticed.

"The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profound was
this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it. I saw, amid
the shadows, the table sink through the floor; a quarter of an hour
later it reappeared, bearing my supper. In an instant, thanks to the
lamp, my chamber was once more lighted.

"I was determined to eat only such things as could not possibly have
anything soporific introduced into them. Two eggs and some fruit
composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from my
protecting fountain, and drank it.

"At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the same taste as
in the morning. Suspicion instantly seized me. I paused, but I had
already drunk half a glass.

"I threw the rest away with horror, and waited, with the dew of fear
upon my brow.

"No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water from that
fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it, the better to
assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruelly pursued.

"Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to appear; but
as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I contended longer, and
instead of falling entirely asleep, I sank into a state of drowsiness
which left me a perception of what was passing around me, while
depriving me of the strength either to defend myself or to fly.

"I dragged myself toward the bed, to seek the only defense I had
left--my saving knife; but I could not reach the bolster. I sank on my
knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then I felt that I
was lost."

Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor crept through
his whole body.

"And what was most frightful," continued Milady, her voice altered, as
if she still experienced the same agony as at that awful minute, "was
that at this time I retained a consciousness of the danger that
threatened me; was that my soul, if I may say so, waked in my sleeping
body; was that I saw, that I heard. It is true that all was like a
dream, but it was not the less frightful.

"I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heard the
well-known creaking of the door although I had heard that door open but
twice.

"I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said that the
doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels the approach of the
serpent.

"I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out. By an incredible
effort of will I even raised myself up, but only to sink down again
immediately, and to fall into the arms of my persecutor."

"Tell me who this man was!" cried the young officer.

Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she inspired in
Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital; but she would not
spare him a single pang. The more profoundly she wounded his heart, the
more certainly he would avenge her. She continued, then, as if she had
not heard his exclamation, or as if she thought the moment was not yet
come to reply to it.

"Only this time it was no longer an inert body, without feeling, that
the villain had to deal with. I have told you that without being able to
regain the complete exercise of my faculties, I retained the sense of my
danger. I struggled, then, with all my strength, and doubtless opposed,
weak as I was, a long resistance, for I heard him cry out, 'These
miserable Puritans! I knew very well that they tired out their
executioners, but I did not believe them so strong against their
lovers!'

"Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long. I felt my strength
fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the coward to
prevail, but my swoon."

Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except an inward
expression of agony. The sweat streamed down his marble forehead, and
his hand, under his coat, tore his breast.

"My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under my pillow for
the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had not been useful for
defense, it might at least serve for expiation.

"But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred to me. I
have sworn to tell you all, and I will tell you all. I have promised you
the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroy me."

"The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, did it
not?" cried Felton.

"Yes," said Milady. "The idea was not that of a Christian, I knew; but
without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, that lion roaring
constantly around us, breathed it into my mind. In short, what shall I
say to you, Felton?" continued Milady, in the tone of a woman accusing
herself of a crime. "This idea occurred to me, and did not leave me; it
is of this homicidal thought that I now bear the punishment."

"Continue, continue!" said Felton; "I am eager to see you attain your
vengeance!"

"Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible. I had no
doubt he would return the following night. During the day I had nothing
to fear.

"When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitate to eat
and drink. I had determined to make believe sup, but to eat nothing. I
was forced, then, to combat the fast of the evening with the nourishment
of the morning.

"Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after my breakfast,
thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when I remained
forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.

"The day passed away without having any other influence on me than to
strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took care that my face
should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for I had no doubt I was
watched. Several times, even, I felt a smile on my lips. Felton, I dare
not tell you at what idea I smiled; you would hold me in horror--"

"Go on! go on!" said Felton; "you see plainly that I listen, and that I
am anxious to know the end."

"Evening came; the ordinary events took place. During the darkness, as
before, my supper was brought. Then the lamp was lighted, and I sat down
to table. I only ate some fruit. I pretended to pour out water from the
jug, but I only drank that which I had saved in my glass. The
substitution was made so carefully that my spies, if I had any, could
have no suspicion of it.

"After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on the preceding
evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or as if I had become
familiarized with danger, I dragged myself toward my bed, let my robe
fall, and lay down.

"I found my knife where I had placed it, under my pillow, and while
feigning to sleep, my hand grasped the handle of it convulsively.

"Two hours passed away without anything fresh happening. Oh, my God! who
could have said so the evening before? I began to fear that he would not
come.

"At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in the depths of
the ceiling; my chamber was filled with darkness and obscurity, but I
made a strong effort to penetrate this darkness and obscurity.

"Nearly ten minutes passed; I heard no other noise but the beating of my
own heart. I implored heaven that he might come.

"At length I heard the well-known noise of the door, which opened and
shut; I heard, notwithstanding the thickness of the carpet, a step which
made the floor creak; I saw, notwithstanding the darkness, a shadow
which approached my bed."

"Haste! haste!" said Felton; "do you not see that each of your words
burns me like molten lead?"

"Then," continued Milady, "then I collected all my strength; I recalled
to my mind that the moment of vengeance, or rather, of justice, had
struck. I looked upon myself as another Judith; I gathered myself up, my
knife in my hand, and when I saw him near me, stretching out his arms to
find his victim, then, with the last cry of agony and despair, I struck
him in the middle of his breast.

"The miserable villain! He had foreseen all. His breast was covered with
a coat-of-mail; the knife was bent against it.

"'Ah, ah!' cried he, seizing my arm, and wresting from me the weapon
that had so badly served me, 'you want to take my life, do you, my
pretty Puritan? But that's more than dislike, that's ingratitude! Come,
come, calm yourself, my sweet girl! I thought you had softened. I am not
one of those tyrants who detain women by force. You don't love me. With
my usual fatuity I doubted it; now I am convinced. Tomorrow you shall be
free.'

"I had but one wish; that was that he should kill me.

"'Beware!' said I, 'for my liberty is your dishonor.'

"'Explain yourself, my pretty sibyl!'

"'Yes; for as soon as I leave this place I will tell everything. I will
proclaim the violence you have used toward me. I will describe my
captivity. I will denounce this place of infamy. You are placed on high,
my Lord, but tremble! Above you there is the king; above the king there
is God!'

"However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutor allowed a
movement of anger to escape him. I could not see the expression of his
countenance, but I felt the arm tremble upon which my hand was placed.

"'Then you shall not leave this place,' said he.

"'Very well,' cried I, 'then the place of my punishment will be that of
my tomb. I will die here, and you will see if a phantom that accuses is
not more terrible than a living being that threatens!'

"'You shall have no weapon left in your power.'

"'There is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach of every
creature who has the courage to use it. I will allow myself to die with
hunger.'

"'Come,' said the wretch, 'is not peace much better than such a war as
that? I will restore you to liberty this moment; I will proclaim you a
piece of immaculate virtue; I will name you the Lucretia of England.'

"'And I will say that you are the Sextus. I will denounce you before
men, as I have denounced you before God; and if it be necessary that,
like Lucretia, I should sign my accusation with my blood, I will sign
it.'

"'Ah!' said my enemy, in a jeering tone, 'that's quite another thing. My
faith! everything considered, you are very well off here. You shall want
for nothing, and if you let yourself die of hunger that will be your own
fault.'

"At these words he retired. I heard the door open and shut, and I
remained overwhelmed, less, I confess it, by my grief than by the
mortification of not having avenged myself.

"He kept his word. All the day, all the next night passed away without
my seeing him again. But I also kept my word with him, and I neither ate
nor drank. I was, as I told him, resolved to die of hunger.

"I passed the day and the night in prayer, for I hoped that God would
pardon me my suicide.

"The second night the door opened; I was lying on the floor, for my
strength began to abandon me.

"At the noise I raised myself up on one hand.

"'Well,' said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner in my ear
not to be recognized, 'well! Are we softened a little? Will we not pay
for our liberty with a single promise of silence? Come, I am a good sort
of a prince,' added he, 'and although I like not Puritans I do them
justice; and it is the same with Puritanesses, when they are pretty.
Come, take a little oath for me on the cross; I won't ask anything more
of you.'

"'On the cross,' cried I, rising, for at that abhorred voice I had
recovered all my strength, 'on the cross I swear that no promise, no
menace, no force, no torture, shall close my mouth! On the cross I swear
to denounce you everywhere as a murderer, as a thief of honor, as a base
coward! On the cross I swear, if I ever leave this place, to call down
vengeance upon you from the whole human race!'

"'Beware!' said the voice, in a threatening accent that I had never yet
heard. 'I have an extraordinary means which I will not employ but in the
last extremity to close your mouth, or at least to prevent anyone from
believing a word you may utter.'

"I mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst of laughter.

"He saw that it was a merciless war between us--a war to the death.

"'Listen!' said he. 'I give you the rest of tonight and all day
tomorrow. Reflect: promise to be silent, and riches, consideration, even
honor, shall surround you; threaten to speak, and I will condemn you to
infamy.'

"'You?' cried I. 'You?'

"'To interminable, ineffaceable infamy!'

"'You?' repeated I. Oh, I declare to you, Felton, I thought him mad!

"'Yes, yes, I!' replied he.

"'Oh, leave me!' said I. 'Begone, if you do not desire to see me dash my
head against that wall before your eyes!'

"'Very well, it is your own doing. Till tomorrow evening, then!'

"'Till tomorrow evening, then!' replied I, allowing myself to fall, and
biting the carpet with rage."

Felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture; and Milady saw,
with the joy of a demon, that his strength would fail him perhaps before
the end of her recital.





57 MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY


After a moment of silence employed by Milady in observing the young man
who listened to her, Milady continued her recital.

"It was nearly three days since I had eaten or drunk anything. I
suffered frightful torments. At times there passed before me clouds
which pressed my brow, which veiled my eyes; this was delirium.

"When the evening came I was so weak that every time I fainted I thanked
God, for I thought I was about to die.

"In the midst of one of these swoons I heard the door open. Terror
recalled me to myself.

"He entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask. He was masked
likewise; but I knew his step, I knew his voice, I knew him by that
imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon his person for the curse
of humanity.

"'Well,' said he to me, 'have you made your mind up to take the oath I
requested of you?'

"'You have said Puritans have but one word. Mine you have heard, and
that is to pursue you--on earth to the tribunal of men, in heaven to the
tribunal of God.'

"'You persist, then?'

"'I swear it before the God who hears me. I will take the whole world as
a witness of your crime, and that until I have found an avenger.'

"'You are a prostitute,' said he, in a voice of thunder, 'and you shall
undergo the punishment of prostitutes! Branded in the eyes of the world
you invoke, try to prove to that world that you are neither guilty nor
mad!'

"Then, addressing the man who accompanied him, 'Executioner,' said he,
'do your duty.'"

"Oh, his name, his name!" cried Felton. "His name, tell it me!"

"Then in spite of my cries, in spite of my resistance--for I began to
comprehend that there was a question of something worse than death--the
executioner seized me, threw me on the floor, fastened me with his
bonds, and suffocated by sobs, almost without sense, invoking God, who
did not listen to me, I uttered all at once a frightful cry of pain and
shame. A burning fire, a red-hot iron, the iron of the executioner, was
imprinted on my shoulder."

Felton uttered a groan.

"Here," said Milady, rising with the majesty of a queen, "here, Felton,
behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl, the victim of
the brutality of a villain. Learn to know the heart of men, and
henceforth make yourself less easily the instrument of their unjust
vengeance."

Milady, with a rapid gesture, opened her robe, tore the cambric that
covered her bosom, and red with feigned anger and simulated shame,
showed the young man the ineffaceable impression which dishonored that
beautiful shoulder.

"But," cried Felton, "that is a FLEUR-DE-LIS which I see there."

"And therein consisted the infamy," replied Milady. "The brand of
England!--it would be necessary to prove what tribunal had imposed it on
me, and I could have made a public appeal to all the tribunals of the
kingdom; but the brand of France!--oh, by that, by THAT I was branded
indeed!"

This was too much for Felton.

Pale, motionless, overwhelmed by this frightful revelation, dazzled by
the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiled herself before him with
an immodesty which appeared to him sublime, he ended by falling on his
knees before her as the early Christians did before those pure and holy
martyrs whom the persecution of the emperors gave up in the circus to
the sanguinary sensuality of the populace. The brand disappeared; the
beauty alone remained.

"Pardon! Pardon!" cried Felton, "oh, pardon!"

Milady read in his eyes LOVE! LOVE!

"Pardon for what?" asked she.

"Pardon me for having joined with your persecutors."

Milady held out her hand to him.

"So beautiful! so young!" cried Felton, covering that hand with his
kisses.

Milady let one of those looks fall upon him which make a slave of a
king.

Felton was a Puritan; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kiss her
feet.

He no longer loved her; he adored her.

When this crisis was past, when Milady appeared to have resumed her
self-possession, which she had never lost; when Felton had seen her
recover with the veil of chastity those treasures of love which were
only concealed from him to make him desire them the more ardently, he
said, "Ah, now! I have only one thing to ask of you; that is, the name
of your true executioner. For to me there is but one; the other was an
instrument, that was all."

"What, brother!" cried Milady, "must I name him again? Have you not yet
divined who he is?"

"What?" cried Felton, "he--again he--always he? What--the truly guilty?"

"The truly guilty," said Milady, "is the ravager of England, the
persecutor of true believers, the base ravisher of the honor of so many
women--he who, to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart, is about to
make England shed so much blood, who protects the Protestants today and
will betray them tomorrow--"

"Buckingham! It is, then, Buckingham!" cried Felton, in a high state of
excitement.

Milady concealed her face in her hands, as if she could not endure the
shame which this name recalled to her.

"Buckingham, the executioner of this angelic creature!" cried Felton.
"And thou hast not hurled thy thunder at him, my God! And thou hast left
him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin of us all!"

"God abandons him who abandons himself," said Milady.

"But he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the damned!"
said Felton, with increasing exultation. "He wills that human vengeance
should precede celestial justice."

"Men fear him and spare him."

"I," said Felton, "I do not fear him, nor will I spare him."

The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy.

"But how can Lord de Winter, my protector, my father," asked Felton,
"possibly be mixed up with all this?"

"Listen, Felton," resumed Milady, "for by the side of base and
contemptible men there are often found great and generous natures. I had
an affianced husband, a man whom I loved, and who loved me--a heart like
yours, Felton, a man like you. I went to him and told him all; he knew
me, that man did, and did not doubt an instant. He was a nobleman, a man
equal to Buckingham in every respect. He said nothing; he only girded on
his sword, wrapped himself in his cloak, and went straight to Buckingham
Palace.

"Yes, yes," said Felton; "I understand how he would act. But with such
men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is the poniard."

"Buckingham had left England the day before, sent as ambassador to
Spain, to demand the hand of the Infanta for King Charles I, who was
then only Prince of Wales. My affianced husband returned.

"'Hear me,' said he; 'this man has gone, and for the moment has
consequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as we were to
have been, and then leave it to Lord de Winter to maintain his own honor
and that of his wife.'"

"Lord de Winter!" cried Felton.

"Yes," said Milady, "Lord de Winter; and now you can understand it all,
can you not? Buckingham remained nearly a year absent. A week before his
return Lord de Winter died, leaving me his sole heir. Whence came the
blow? God who knows all, knows without doubt; but as for me, I accuse
nobody."

"Oh, what an abyss; what an abyss!" cried Felton.

"Lord de Winter died without revealing anything to his brother. The
terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst, like a clap of
thunder, over the head of the guilty. Your protector had seen with pain
this marriage of his elder brother with a portionless girl. I was
sensible that I could look for no support from a man disappointed in his
hopes of an inheritance. I went to France, with a determination to
remain there for the rest of my life. But all my fortune is in England.
Communication being closed by the war, I was in want of everything. I
was then obliged to come back again. Six days ago, I landed at
Portsmouth."

"Well?" said Felton.

"Well; Buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return. He spoke
of me to Lord de Winter, already prejudiced against me, and told him
that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a branded woman. The noble and
pure voice of my husband was no longer here to defend me. Lord de Winter
believed all that was told him with so much the more ease that it was
his interest to believe it. He caused me to be arrested, had me
conducted hither, and placed me under your guard. You know the rest. The
day after tomorrow he banishes me, he transports me; the day after
tomorrow he exiles me among the infamous. Oh, the train is well laid;
the plot is clever. My honor will not survive it! You see, then, Felton,
I can do nothing but die. Felton, give me that knife!"

And at these words, as if all her strength was exhausted, Milady sank,
weak and languishing, into the arms of the young officer, who,
intoxicated with love, anger, and voluptuous sensations hitherto
unknown, received her with transport, pressed her against his heart, all
trembling at the breath from that charming mouth, bewildered by the
contact with that palpitating bosom.

"No, no," said he. "No, you shall live honored and pure; you shall live
to triumph over your enemies."

Milady put him from her slowly with her hand, while drawing him nearer
with her look; but Felton, in his turn, embraced her more closely,
imploring her like a divinity.

"Oh, death, death!" said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids, "oh,
death, rather than shame! Felton, my brother, my friend, I conjure you!"

"No," cried Felton, "no; you shall live and you shall be avenged."

"Felton, I bring misfortune to all who surround me! Felton, abandon me!
Felton, let me die!"

"Well, then, we will live and die together!" cried he, pressing his lips
to those of the prisoner.

Several strokes resounded on the door; this time Milady really pushed
him away from her.

"Hark," said she, "we have been overheard! Someone is coming! All is
over! We are lost!"

"No," said Felton; it is only the sentinel warning me that they are
about to change the guard."

"Then run to the door, and open it yourself."

Felton obeyed; this woman was now his whole thought, his whole soul.

He found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a watch-patrol.

"Well, what is the matter?" asked the young lieutenant.

"You told me to open the door if I heard anyone cry out," said the
soldier; "but you forgot to leave me the key. I heard you cry out,
without understanding what you said. I tried to open the door, but it
was locked inside; then I called the sergeant."

"And here I am," said the sergeant.

Felton, quite bewildered, almost mad, stood speechless.

Milady plainly perceived that it was now her turn to take part in the
scene. She ran to the table, and seizing the knife which Felton had laid
down, exclaimed, "And by what right will you prevent me from dying?"

"Great God!" exclaimed Felton, on seeing the knife glitter in her hand.

At that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through the
corridor. The baron, attracted by the noise, in his chamber gown, his
sword under his arm, stood in the doorway.

"Ah," said he, "here we are, at the last act of the tragedy. You see,
Felton, the drama has gone through all the phases I named; but be easy,
no blood will flow."

Milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave Felton an immediate
and terrible proof of her courage.

"You are mistaken, my Lord, blood will flow; and may that blood fall
back on those who cause it to flow!"

Felton uttered a cry, and rushed toward her. He was too late; Milady had
stabbed herself.

But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, come in
contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like a cuirass,
defended the chests of women. It had glided down it, tearing the robe,
and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh and the ribs. Milady's
robe was not the less stained with blood in a second.

Milady fell down, and seemed to be in a swoon.

Felton snatched away the knife.

"See, my Lord," said he, in a deep, gloomy tone, "here is a woman who
was under my guard, and who has killed herself!"

"Be at ease, Felton," said Lord de Winter. "She is not dead; demons do
not die so easily. Be tranquil, and go wait for me in my chamber."

"But, my Lord--"

"Go, sir, I command you!"

At this injunction from his superior, Felton obeyed; but in going out,
he put the knife into his bosom.

As to Lord de Winter, he contented himself with calling the woman who
waited on Milady, and when she was come, he recommended the prisoner,
who was still fainting, to her care, and left them alone.

Meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding his suspicions, as
the wound might be serious, he immediately sent off a mounted man to
find a physician.





