36 DREAM OF VENGEANCE


That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d'Artagnan came as usual,
he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.

The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him
all that had passed on the preceding evening. D'Artagnan smiled; this
jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.

That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding
evening. She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before she
expected him in vain.

The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at d'Artagnan's, she was
no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the
contrary sad as death.

D'Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she, as
her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.

This letter was in Milady's handwriting; only this time it was addressed
to M. d'Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.

He opened it and read as follows:

Dear M. d'Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. Will it be the same this evening?

Your very grateful, Milady Clarik

"That's all very simple," said d'Artagnan; "I expected this letter. My
credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de Wardes."

"And will you go?" asked Kitty.

"Listen to me, my dear girl," said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; "you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?"

"Oh, my God!" said Kitty, "you know how to represent things in such a
way that you are always in the right. You are going now to pay your
court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your
own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than before."

Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen. D'Artagnan
reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to
the seductions of Milady.

He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more grateful
for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient to her
orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able--to such
experienced eyes as those of Milady--to disguise his writing
sufficiently.

As nine o'clock sounded, d'Artagnan was at the Place Royale. It was
evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned, for
as soon as d'Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady were
visible, one of them ran to announce him.

"Show him in," said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that
d'Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

He was introduced.

"I am at home to nobody," said Milady; "observe, to nobody." The servant
went out.

D'Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady. She was pale, and looked
fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep. The number of lights had
been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the
traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.

D'Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry. She then made an
extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed
countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.

To the questions which d'Artagnan put concerning her health, she
replied, "Bad, very bad."

"Then," replied he, "my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in need
of repose, and I will withdraw."

"No, no!" said Milady. "On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d'Artagnan; your
agreeable company will divert me."

"Oh, oh!" thought d'Artagnan. "She has never been so kind before. On
guard!"

Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more
than her usual brilliancy. At the same time the fever, which for an
instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to her
cheeks, and vermillion to her lips. D'Artagnan was again in the presence
of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments. His
love, which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep, awoke
again in his heart. Milady smiled, and d'Artagnan felt that he could
damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at which he felt
something like remorse.

By degrees, Milady became more communicative. She asked d'Artagnan if he
had a mistress.

"Alas!" said d'Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume,
"can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me--to me, who, from
the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for
you?"

Milady smiled with a strange smile.

"Then you love me?" said she.

"Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?"

"It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the more
difficult they are to be won."

"Oh, difficulties do not affright me," said d'Artagnan. "I shrink before
nothing but impossibilities."

"Nothing is impossible," replied Milady, "to true love."

"Nothing, madame?"

"Nothing," replied Milady.

"The devil!" thought d'Artagnan. "The note is changed. Is she going to
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be
disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me
for de Wardes?"

D'Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady's.

"Well, now," she said, "let us see what you would do to prove this love
of which you speak."

"All that could be required of me. Order; I am ready."

"For everything?"

"For everything," cried d'Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not
much to risk in engaging himself thus.

"Well, now let us talk a little seriously," said Milady, in her turn
drawing her armchair nearer to d'Artagnan's chair.

"I am all attention, madame," said he.

Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if
appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, "I have an enemy."

"You, madame!" said d'Artagnan, affecting surprise; "is that possible,
my God?--good and beautiful as you are!"

"A mortal enemy."

"Indeed!"

"An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is
war to the death. May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?"

D'Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature
wished to reach.

"You may, madame," said he, with emphasis. "My arm and my life belong to
you, like my love."

"Then," said Milady, "since you are as generous as you are loving--"

She stopped.

"Well?" demanded d'Artagnan.

"Well," replied Milady, after a moment of silence, "from the present
time, cease to talk of impossibilities."

"Do not overwhelm me with happiness," cried d'Artagnan, throwing himself
on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him.

"Avenge me of that infamous de Wardes," said Milady, between her teeth,
"and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--you double idiot, you
animated sword blade!"

"Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous woman," said
d'Artagnan, likewise to himself, "after having abused me with such
effrontery, and afterward I will laugh at you with him whom you wish me
to kill."

D'Artagnan lifted up his head.

"I am ready," said he.

"You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Milady.

"I could interpret one of your looks."

"Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so
much renown?"

"Instantly!"

"But on my part," said Milady, "how should I repay such a service? I
know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing."

"You know the only reply that I desire," said d'Artagnan, "the only one
worthy of you and of me!"

And he drew nearer to her.

She scarcely resisted.

"Interested man!" cried she, smiling.

"Ah," cried d'Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman
had the power to kindle in his heart, "ah, that is because my happiness
appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly
away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it."

"Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!"

"I am at your orders," said d'Artagnan.

"Quite certain?" said Milady, with a last doubt.

"Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful
eyes!"

"Who told you that I had been weeping?" said she.

"It appeared to me--"

"Such women as I never weep," said Milady.

"So much the better! Come, tell me his name!"

"Remember that his name is all my secret."

"Yet I must know his name."

"Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!"

"You overwhelm me with joy. What is his name?"

"You know him."

"Indeed."

"Yes."

"It is surely not one of my friends?" replied d'Artagnan, affecting
hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.

"If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?" cried Milady;
and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.

"Not if it were my own brother!" cried d'Artagnan, as if carried away by
his enthusiasm.

Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.

"I love your devotedness," said Milady.

"Alas, do you love nothing else in me?" asked d'Artagnan.

"I love you also, YOU!" said she, taking his hand.

The warm pressure made d'Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that fever
which consumed Milady attacked himself.

"You love me, you!" cried he. "Oh, if that were so, I should lose my
reason!"

And he folded her in his arms. She made no effort to remove her lips
from his kisses; only she did not respond to them. Her lips were cold;
it appeared to d'Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.

He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love. He almost
believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of
de Wardes. If de Wardes had at that moment been under his hand, he would
have killed him.

Milady seized the occasion.

"His name is--" said she, in her turn.

"De Wardes; I know it," cried d'Artagnan.

"And how do you know it?" asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and
endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.

D'Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he
had committed an error.

"Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say," repeated Milady, "how do you know
it?"

"How do I know it?" said d'Artagnan.

"Yes."

"I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I
was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you."

"Wretch!" cried Milady.

The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom
of d'Artagnan's heart.

"Well?" continued she.

"Well, I will avenge you of this wretch," replied d'Artagnan, giving
himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.

"Thanks, my brave friend!" cried Milady; "and when shall I be avenged?"

"Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!"

Milady was about to cry out, "Immediately," but she reflected that such
precipitation would not be very gracious toward d'Artagnan.

Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to
give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with the
count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
d'Artagnan's. "Tomorrow," said he, "you will be avenged, or I shall be
dead."

"No," said she, "you will avenge me; but you will not be dead. He is a
coward."

"With women, perhaps; but not with men. I know something of him."

"But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in
your contest with him."

"Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back
tomorrow."

"Which means that you now hesitate?"

"No, I do not hesitate; God forbid! But would it be just to allow me to
go to a possible death without having given me at least something more
than hope?"

Milady answered by a glance which said, "Is that all?--speak, then." And
then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, "That is but too
just," said she, tenderly.

"Oh, you are an angel!" exclaimed the young man.

"Then all is agreed?" said she.

"Except that which I ask of you, dear love."

"But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?"

"I cannot wait till tomorrow."

"Silence! I hear my brother. It will be useless for him to find you
here."

She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

"Go out this way," said she, opening a small private door, "and come
back at eleven o'clock; we will then terminate this conversation. Kitty
will conduct you to my chamber."

The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.

"Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a
statue? Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at
eleven o'clock--you have heard what I said."

"It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o'clock,"
thought d'Artagnan; "that's a settled custom."

Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.

"But," said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches
of Kitty, "I must not play the fool. This woman is certainly a great
liar. I must take care."





37 MILADY'S SECRET


D'Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to Kitty's
chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--and that for two
reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches,
recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to
have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

What was most clear in the matter was that d'Artagnan loved Milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. In an instant d'Artagnan
perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home
and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
and de Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and
that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to
kill the Comte de Wardes. But he also was spurred on by a ferocious
desire of vengeance. He wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and
as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he
could not make up his mind to renounce it.

He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in Milady's apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. It was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the
first.

At length the light disappeared. With this light was extinguished the
last irresolution in the heart of d'Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on
fire he re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty's chamber.

The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to
delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the
noise d'Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, "Come in."

All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous effrontery,
that d'Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard. He
imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one
meets in dreams. He, however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady,
yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over
iron.

As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an
outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she
reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having
assisted in such a machination, and above all, that d'Artagnan would
also be lost to her forever. This last thought of love counseled her to
make this last sacrifice.

D'Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes. It was
no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was apparently
beloved. A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart,
that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed
till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness silenced
this voice and stifled its murmurs. And then our Gascon, with that large
quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared himself with de
Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
himself?

He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment. Milady was no
longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment
terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning
herself to love which she also seemed to feel. Two hours thus glided
away. When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had
not the same motives for forgetfulness that d'Artagnan had, was the
first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which
were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and de Wardes
were already arranged in his mind.

But d'Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot
himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to
think about duels and sword thrusts.

This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified
Milady, whose questions became more pressing.

Then d'Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible
duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

D'Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to
renounce, by pardoning de Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a sharp,
bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, "Are you
afraid, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan?"

"You cannot think so, dear love!" replied d'Artagnan; "but now, suppose
this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than you think him?"

"At all events," said Milady, seriously, "he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death."

"He shall die, then, since you condemn him!" said d'Artagnan, in so firm
a tone that it appeared to Milady an undoubted proof of devotion. This
reassured her.

We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but d'Artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness. Seeing
d'Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her
on the Comte de Wardes.

"I am quite ready," said d'Artagnan; "but in the first place I should
like to be certain of one thing."

"And what is that?" asked Milady.

"That is, whether you really love me?"

"I have given you proof of that, it seems to me."

"And I am yours, body and soul!"

"Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?"

"Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say," replied d'Artagnan,
"do you not entertain a little fear on my account?"

"What have I to fear?"

"Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even."

"Impossible!" cried Milady, "you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman."

"You would not, then, prefer a method," resumed d'Artagnan, "which would
equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?"

Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

"Really," said she, "I believe you now begin to hesitate."

"No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. I think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement."

"Who told you that I loved him?" asked Milady, sharply.

"At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another," said the young man, in a caressing tone, "and I
repeat that I am really interested for the count."

"You?" asked Milady.

"Yes, I."

"And why YOU?"

"Because I alone know--"

"What?"

"That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you
as he appears."

"Indeed!" said Milady, in an anxious tone; "explain yourself, for I
really cannot tell what you mean."

And she looked at d'Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes which
seemed to burn themselves away.

"Yes; I am a man of honor," said d'Artagnan, determined to come to an
end, "and since your love is mine, and I am satisfied I possess it--for
I do possess it, do I not?"

"Entirely; go on."

"Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on my mind."

"A confession!"

"If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you love
me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?"

"Without doubt."

"Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself culpable toward
you, you will pardon me?"

"Perhaps."

D'Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to Milady's,
but she evaded him.

"This confession," said she, growing paler, "what is this confession?"

"You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
you not?"

"No, no! It is not true," said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if d'Artagnan had not been in such
perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

"Do not lie, my angel," said d'Artagnan, smiling; "that would be
useless."

"What do you mean? Speak! you kill me."

"Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already pardoned
you."

"What next? what next?"

"De Wardes cannot boast of anything."

"How is that? You told me yourself that that ring--"

"That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the d'Artagnan of
today are the same person."

The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame--a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed d'Artagnan's attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

It was almost broad daylight.

D'Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to
implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of
those lovely shoulders, round and white, d'Artagnan recognized, with
inexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indelible mark which
the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.

"Great God!" cried d'Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and
remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.

But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror. He had doubtless
seen all. The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret--the
secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
which all the world was ignorant, except himself.

She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but like a wounded
panther.

"Ah, wretch!" cried she, "you have basely betrayed me, and still more,
you have my secret! You shall die."

And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing
table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a
small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then threw
herself with a bound upon d'Artagnan.

Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
those bleeding lips. He recoiled to the other side of the room as he
would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his
sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
unconsciously from the scabbard. But without taking any heed of the
sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did
not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.

She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but d'Artagnan kept it
free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her eyes,
sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the bedstead,
while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty's
apartment.

Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury,
screaming in a formidable way.

As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, d'Artagnan began
to recover himself little by little.

"Well, beautiful lady, very well," said he; "but, PARDIEU, if you don't
calm yourself, I will design a second FLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those
pretty cheeks!"

"Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!" howled Milady.

But d'Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty's
door. At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her
efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to
keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door. D'Artagnan, who had
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
paces from it. With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and
placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.

Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength
apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish
this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point of
which repeatedly glittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied
with terrible imprecations.

"Quick, Kitty, quick!" said d'Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the
bolts were fast, "let me get out of the hotel; for if we leave her time
to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants."

"But you can't go out so," said Kitty; "you are naked."

"That's true," said d'Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he
found himself in, "that's true. But dress me as well as you are able,
only make haste; think, my dear girl, it's life and death!"

Kitty was but too well aware of that. In a turn of the hand she muffled
him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak. She gave him some
slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him down
the stairs. It was time. Milady had already rung her bell, and roused
the whole hotel. The porter was drawing the cord at the moment Milady
cried from her window, "Don't open!"

The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent
gesture. The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into
her chamber.





38 HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT


D'Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of
what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and
did not stop till he came to Athos's door. The confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos's apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and d'Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

"Holloa, there!" cried he; "what do you want, you strumpet? What's your
business here, you hussy?"

D'Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perceived he had to deal with a man. He then concluded it must be
an assassin.

"Help! murder! help!" cried he.

"Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!" said the young man; "I am
d'Artagnan; don't you know me? Where is your master?"

"You, Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried Grimaud, "impossible."

"Grimaud," said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
"Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?"

"Ah, monsieur, it is--"

"Silence!"

Grimaud contented himself with pointing d'Artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes--petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

"Don't laugh, my friend!" cried d'Artagnan; "for heaven's sake, don't
laugh, for upon my soul, it's no laughing matter!"

And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a
real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
"Are you wounded, my friend? How pale you are!"

"No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure! Are you alone,
Athos?"

"PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?"

"Well, well!" and d'Artagnan rushed into Athos's chamber.

"Come, speak!" said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. "Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!"

"Athos," said d'Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, "prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story."

"Well, but put on this dressing gown first," said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D'Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

"Well?" said Athos.

"Well," replied d'Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos's ear, and
lowering his voice, "Milady is marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her
shoulder!"

"Ah!" cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

"Let us see," said d'Artagnan. "Are you SURE that the OTHER is dead?"

"THE OTHER?" said Athos, in so stifled a voice that d'Artagnan scarcely
heard him.

"Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens."

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

"This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years."

"Fair," said Athos, "is she not?"

"Very."

"Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?"

"Yes."

"Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?"

"Yes."

"The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?"

"Yes."

"But you say she is English?"

"She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only her
brother-in-law."

"I will see her, d'Artagnan!"

"Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail."

"She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself."

"She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?"

"No," said Athos.

"A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"

D'Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

"You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair," said
Athos. "Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are going
according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone--"

"She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!"

"My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?" said Athos.
"Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?"

"There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal's spies, I am sure of that."

"In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and as
hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it's a cardinal's hatred,
take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,
use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your own
shadow."

"Fortunately," said d'Artagnan, "all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread."

"In the meantime," said Athos, "I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you."

"But however near it may be," replied d'Artagnan, "I cannot go thither
in this guise."

"That's true," said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to d'Artagnan's residence, and bring back
some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

"All this will not advance your outfit," said Athos; "for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. Fortunately,
you have the sapphire."

"The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?"

"Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch."

"Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value."

"I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, d'Artagnan."

"Sell it, then."

"Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation."

"Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers."

Athos smiled.

"You are a capital companion, d'Artagnan," said be; "your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition."

"What?"

"That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me."

"Don't dream it, Athos. I don't need the quarter of such a sum--I who am
still only in the Guards--and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that's all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise."

"To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so."

"Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman."

"I don't at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us."

"Well, I will take it, then," said d'Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.

d'Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at d'Artagnan hatefully.

"Make haste, dear lodger," said he; "there is a very pretty girl waiting
for you upstairs; and you know women don't like to be kept waiting."

"That's Kitty!" said d'Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.

Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching
against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble. As soon as
she perceived him, she cried, "You have promised your protection; you
have promised to save me from her anger. Remember, it is you who have
ruined me!"

"Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty," said d'Artagnan; "be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?"

"How can I tell!" said Kitty. "The lackeys were brought by the cries she
made. She was mad with passion. There exist no imprecations she did not
pour out against you. Then I thought she would remember it was through
my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I
was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best of
my things, and I got away.

"Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you? I am going away the day
after tomorrow."

"Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier. Help me out of Paris; help me
out of France!"

"I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle," aid
d'Artagnan.

"No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your
acquaintance--in your own country, for instance."

"My dear little love! In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
But stop! I can manage your business for you. Planchet, go and find
Aramis. Request him to come here directly. We have something very
important to say to him."

"I understand," said Athos; "but why not Porthos? I should have thought
that his duchess--"

"Oh, Porthos's duchess is dressed by her husband's clerks," said
d'Artagnan, laughing. "Besides, Kitty would not like to live in the Rue
aux Ours. Isn't it so, Kitty?"

"I do not care where I live," said Kitty, "provided I am well concealed,
and nobody knows where I am."

"Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer
jealous of me--"

"Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near," said Kitty, "I shall always love
you."

"Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?" murmured Athos.

"And I, also," said d'Artagnan, "I also. I shall always love you; be
sure of that. But now answer me. I attach great importance to the
question I am about to put to you. Did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?"

"There, now! Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?"

"No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--Monsieur Athos, this
gentleman here."

"I?" cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

"You, to be sure!" said d'Artagnan, pressing Athos's hand. "You know the
interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux. Besides,
Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my dear girl,"
continued d'Artagnan, "she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw
at the door as you came in."

"Oh, my God! You remind me of my fright! If he should have known me
again!"

"How? know you again? Did you ever see that man before?"

"He came twice to Milady's."

"That's it. About what time?"

"Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago."

"Exactly so."

"And yesterday evening he came again."

"Yesterday evening?"

"Yes, just before you came."

"My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies. And do you
believe he knew you again, Kitty?"

"I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too
late."

"Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if he be still
at his door."

Athos went down and returned immediately.

"He has gone," said he, "and the house door is shut."

"He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at
this moment in the dovecot."

"Well, then, let us all fly," said Athos, "and leave nobody here but
Planchet to bring us news."

"A minute. Aramis, whom we have sent for!"

"That's true," said Athos; "we must wait for Aramis."

At that moment Aramis entered.

The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to
understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for
Kitty.

Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, "Will it be
really rendering you a service, d'Artagnan?"

"I shall be grateful to you all my life."

"Very well. Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who
resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid. If you can,
my dear d'Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle-"

"Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the person
who will give me the means of quitting Paris."

"Then," said Aramis, "this falls out very well."

He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed
with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.

"And now, my dear girl," said d'Artagnan, "you know that it is not good
for any of us to be here. Therefore let us separate. We shall meet again
in better days."

"And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be," said
Kitty, "you will find me loving you as I love you today."

"Dicers' oaths!" said Athos, while d'Artagnan went to conduct Kitty
downstairs.

An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet
again at four o'clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the
house.

Aramis returned home, and Athos and d'Artagnan busied themselves about
pledging the sapphire.

As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles
on the ring. Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell it
to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he would
give five hundred pistoles for it.

Athos and d'Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the
knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase
the entire equipment of the Musketeer. Besides, Athos was very easy, and
a noble to his fingers' ends. When a thing suited him he paid the price
demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement. D'Artagnan would
have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his shoulder,
with a smile, and d'Artagnan understood that it was all very well for
such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not
for a man who had the bearing of a prince. The Musketeer met with a
superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and
elegant, rising six years. He examined him, and found him sound and
without blemish. They asked a thousand livres for him.

He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while d'Artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money
on the table.

Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not a
sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. D'Artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

"How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased
it?" said Athos.

"Five hundred pistoles."

"That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for you and a
hundred pistoles for me. Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us,
my friend; let us go back to the Jew's again."

"What! will you--"

"This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we
shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that
we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. Go and tell
him the ring is his, d'Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles
with you."

"Reflect, Athos!"

"Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. Go, d'Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with his
musketoon."

A half hour afterward, d'Artagnan returned with the two thousand livres,
and without having met with any accident.

It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.





39 A VISION


At four o'clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos. Their
anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance
only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all
present happiness is concealed a fear for the future.

Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for d'Artagnan.

The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty seal in
green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch.

The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the terrible arms
of his Eminence the cardinal duke.

At the sight of the little letter the heart of d'Artagnan bounded, for
he believed he recognized the handwriting, and although he had seen that
writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart.

He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it eagerly.

"Be," said the letter, "on Thursday next, at from six to seven o'clock
in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, and look carefully into the
carriages that pass; but if you have any consideration for your own life
or that of those who love you, do not speak a single word, do not make a
movement which may lead anyone to believe you have recognized her who
exposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you but for an
instant."

No signature.

"That's a snare," said Athos; "don't go, d'Artagnan."

"And yet," replied d'Artagnan, "I think I recognize the writing."

"It may be counterfeit," said Athos. "Between six and seven o'clock the
road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as well go and ride in the
forest of Bondy."

"But suppose we all go," said d'Artagnan; "what the devil! They won't
devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms, and all!"

"And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments,"
said Porthos.

"But if it is a woman who writes," said Aramis, "and that woman desires
not to be seen, remember, you compromise her, d'Artagnan; which is not
the part of a gentleman."

"We will remain in the background," said Porthos, "and he will advance
alone."

"Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage which goes at a
gallop."

"Bah!" said d'Artagnan, "they will miss me; if they fire we will ride
after the carriage, and exterminate those who may be in it. They must be
enemies."

"He is right," said Porthos; "battle. Besides, we must try our own
arms."

"Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure," said Aramis, with his mild and
careless manner.

"As you please," said Athos.

"Gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "it is half past four, and we have
scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six."

"Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us," said Porthos, "and
that will be a pity. Let us get ready, gentlemen."

"But this second letter," said Athos, "you forget that; it appears to
me, however, that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened. For my
part, I declare, d'Artagnan, I think it of much more consequence than
the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your
bosom."

D'Artagnan blushed.

"Well," said he, "let us see, gentlemen, what are his Eminence's
commands," and d'Artagnan unsealed the letter and read,

"M. d'Artagnan, of the king's Guards, company Dessessart, is expected at
the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight o'clock.

"La Houdiniere, CAPTAIN OF THE GUARDS"

"The devil!" said Athos; "here's a rendezvous much more serious than the
other."

"I will go to the second after attending the first," said d'Artagnan.
"One is for seven o'clock, and the other for eight; there will be time
for both."

"Hum! I would not go at all," said Aramis. "A gallant knight cannot
decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a prudent gentleman may excuse
himself from not waiting on his Eminence, particularly when he has
reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments."

"I am of Aramis's opinion," said Porthos.

"Gentlemen," replied d'Artagnan, "I have already received by Monsieur de
Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence. I neglected it, and on
the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me--Constance disappeared.
Whatever may ensue, I will go."

"If you are determined," said Athos, "do so."

"But the Bastille?" said Aramis.

"Bah! you will get me out if they put me there," said d'Artagnan.

"To be sure we will," replied Aramis and Porthos, with admirable
promptness and decision, as if that were the simplest thing in the
world, "to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set
off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
Bastille."

"Let us do better than that," said Athos; "do not let us leave him
during the whole evening. Let each of us wait at a gate of the palace
with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it. It is a long
time since we have had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the
Cardinal; Monsieur de Treville must think us dead."

"To a certainty, Athos," said Aramis, "you were meant to be a general of
the army! What do you think of the plan, gentlemen?"

"Admirable!" replied the young men in chorus.

"Well," said Porthos, "I will run to the hotel, and engage our comrades
to hold themselves in readiness by eight o'clock; the rendezvous, the
Place du Palais-Cardinal. Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the
horses."

"I have no horse," said d'Artagnan; "but that is of no consequence, I
can take one of Monsieur de Treville's."

"That is not worth while," said Aramis, "you can have one of mine."

"One of yours! how many have you, then?" asked d'Artagnan.

"Three," replied Aramis, smiling.

"Certes," cried Athos, "you are the best-mounted poet of France or
Navarre."

"Well, my dear Aramis, you don't want three horses? I cannot comprehend
what induced you to buy three!"

"Therefore I only purchased two," said Aramis.

"The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?"

"No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of
livery, who would not tell me in whose service he was, and who said he
had received orders from his master."

"Or his mistress," interrupted d'Artagnan.

"That makes no difference," said Aramis, coloring; "and who affirmed, as
I said, that he had received orders from his master or mistress to place
the horse in my stable, without informing me whence it came."

"It is only to poets that such things happen," said Athos, gravely.

"Well, in that case, we can manage famously," said d'Artagnan; "which of
the two horses will you ride--that which you bought or the one that was
given to you?"

"That which was given to me, assuredly. You cannot for a moment imagine,
d'Artagnan, that I would commit such an offense toward--"

"The unknown giver," interrupted d'Artagnan.

"Or the mysterious benefactress," said Athos.

"The one you bought will then become useless to you?"

"Nearly so."

"And you selected it yourself?"

"With the greatest care. The safety of the horseman, you know, depends
almost always upon the goodness of his horse."

"Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?"

"I was going to make you the offer, my dear d'Artagnan, giving you all
the time necessary for repaying me such a trifle."

"How much did it cost you?"

"Eight hundred livres."

"Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend," said d'Artagnan,
taking the sum from his pocket; "I know that is the coin in which you
were paid for your poems."

"You are rich, then?" said Aramis.

"Rich? Richest, my dear fellow!"

And d'Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.

"Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours."

"Very well; but it is already five o'clock, so make haste."

A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue
Ferou on a very handsome genet. Mousqueton followed him upon an Auvergne
horse, small but very handsome. Porthos was resplendent with joy and
pride.

At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb English charger. Bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous Mecklenburg horse; this was
d'Artagnan's mount.

The two Musketeers met at the gate. Athos and d'Artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

"The devil!" cried Aramis, "you have a magnificent horse there,
Porthos."

"Yes," replied Porthos, "it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. A bad joke of the husband's substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and I have obtained full satisfaction."

Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters'
steeds. D'Artagnan and Athos put themselves into saddle with their
companions, and all four set forward; Athos upon a horse he owed to a
woman, Aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he
owed to his procurator's wife, and d'Artagnan on a horse he owed to his
good fortune--the best mistress possible.

The lackeys followed.

As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if
Mme. Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made
upon his handsome Spanish genet, she would not have regretted the
bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband.

Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville, who was
returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offer his compliments
upon their appointments, which in an instant drew round them a hundred
gapers.

D'Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de Treville of
the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal's arms. It is well
understood that he did not breathe a word about the other.

M de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted, and assured him
that if on the morrow he did not appear, he himself would undertake to
find him, let him be where he might.

At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the four friends
pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de Treville.

A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day began to
decline, carriages were passing and repassing. D'Artagnan, keeping at
some distance from his friends, darted a scrutinizing glance into every
carriage that appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.

At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was
beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared, coming at a quick pace on the
road of Sevres. A presentiment instantly told d'Artagnan that this
carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the
young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two
fingers placed upon her mouth, either to enjoin silence or to send him a
kiss. D'Artagnan uttered a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this
apparition--for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision--was
Mme. Bonacieux.

By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given,
d'Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few strides overtook
the carriage; but the window was hermetically closed, the vision had
disappeared.

D'Artagnan then remembered the injunction: "If you value your own life
or that of those who love you, remain motionless, and as if you had seen
nothing."

He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman
who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this
rendezvous.

The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace, till it
dashed into Paris, and disappeared.

D'Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not knowing what to
think. If it was Mme. Bonacieux and if she was returning to Paris, why
this fugitive rendezvous, why this simple exchange of a glance, why this
lost kiss? If, on the other side, it was not she--which was still quite
possible--for the little light that remained rendered a mistake
easy--might it not be the commencement of some plot against him through
the allurement of this woman, for whom his love was known?

His three companions joined him. All had plainly seen a woman's head
appear at the window, but none of them, except Athos, knew Mme.
Bonacieux. The opinion of Athos was that it was indeed she; but less
preoccupied by that pretty face than d'Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a
second head, a man's head, inside the carriage.

"If that be the case," said d'Artagnan, "they are doubtless transporting
her from one prison to another. But what can they intend to do with the
poor creature, and how shall I ever meet her again?"

"Friend," said Athos, gravely, "remember that it is the dead alone with
whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth. You know something
of that, as well as I do, I think. Now, if your mistress is not dead, if
it is she we have just seen, you will meet with her again some day or
other. And perhaps, my God!" added he, with that misanthropic tone which
was peculiar to him, "perhaps sooner than you wish."

Half past seven had sounded. The carriage had been twenty minutes behind
the time appointed. D'Artagnan's friends reminded him that he had a
visit to pay, but at the same time bade him observe that there was yet
time to retract.

But d'Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious. He had made
up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would
learn what his Eminence had to say to him. Nothing could turn him from
his purpose.

They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal
they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking about in expectation
of their comrades. There only they explained to them the matter in hand.

D'Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king's
Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day take his place; he
was considered beforehand as a comrade. It resulted from these
antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which
they met; besides, it would not be unlikely that they would have an
opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn,
and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready.

Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of one, gave
the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos; and then each group went
and took their watch near an entrance.

D'Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal gate.

Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without a
little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase, step by step. His
conduct toward Milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery, and he was
very suspicious of the political relations which existed between that
woman and the cardinal. Still further, de Wardes, whom he had treated so
ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and d'Artagnan knew that
while his Eminence was terrible to his enemies, he was strongly attached
to his friends.

"If de Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal, which is not
to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, I may
consider myself almost as a condemned man," said d'Artagnan, shaking his
head. "But why has he waited till now? That's all plain enough. Milady
has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which
renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the cup
overflow."

"Fortunately," added he, "my good friends are down yonder, and they will
not allow me to be carried away without a struggle. Nevertheless,
Monsieur de Treville's company of Musketeers alone cannot maintain a war
against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all France, and
before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
D'Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have
excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!"

He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber. He
placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into
the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace.

In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinals Guards, who
recognized d'Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded
Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning.

This smile appeared to d'Artagnan to be of bad augury. Only, as our
Gascon was not easily intimidated--or rather, thanks to a great pride
natural to the men of his country, he did not allow one easily to see
what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all
resembled fear--he placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the
Guards, and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no means
deficient in majesty.

The usher returned and made a sign to d'Artagnan to follow him. It
appeared to the young man that the Guards, on seeing him depart,
chuckled among themselves.

He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and
found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing.

The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a word.
D'Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.

D'Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some judge examining
his papers; but he perceived that the man at the desk wrote, or rather
corrected, lines of unequal length, scanning the words on his fingers.
He saw then that he was with a poet. At the end of an instant the poet
closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written "Mirame, a
Tragedy in Five Acts," and raised his head.

D'Artagnan recognized the cardinal.





40 A TERRIBLE VISION


The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek upon his
hand, and looked intently at the young man for a moment. No one had a
more searching eye than the Cardinal de Richelieu, and d'Artagnan felt
this glance run through his veins like a fever.

He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his hand and
awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without too much assurance,
but also without too much humility.

"Monsieur," said the cardinal, "are you a d'Artagnan from Bearn?"

"Yes, monseigneur," replied the young man.

"There are several branches of the d'Artagnans at Tarbes and in its
environs," said the cardinal; "to which do you belong?"

"I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under the great
King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty."

"That is well. It is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your
country to seek your fortune in the capital?"

"Yes, monseigneur."

"You came through Meung, where something befell you. I don't very well
know what, but still something."

"Monseigneur," said d'Artagnan, "this was what happened to me--"

"Never mind, never mind!" resumed the cardinal, with a smile which
indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
"You were recommended to Monsieur de Treville, were you not?"

"Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at Meung--"

"The letter was lost," replied his Eminence; "yes, I know that. But
Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first
sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur
Dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter
the Musketeers."

"Monseigneur is correctly informed," said d'Artagnan.

"Since that time many things have happened to you. You were walking one
day behind the Chartreux, when it would have been better if you had been
elsewhere. Then you took with your friends a journey to the waters of
Forges; they stopped on the road, but you continued yours. That is all
very simple: you had business in England."

"Monseigneur," said d'Artagnan, quite confused, "I went--"

"Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere--that concerns nobody. I know, because
it is my office to know everything. On your return you were received by
an august personage, and I perceive with pleasure that you preserve the
souvenir she gave you."

D'Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen's diamond, which he wore, and
quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too late.

"The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois," resumed the
cardinal. "He went to desire you to come to the palace. You have not
returned that visit, and you were wrong."

"Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your Eminence."

"How could that be, monsieur? Could you incur my displeasure by having
followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and courage
than another would have done? It is the people who do not obey that I
punish, and not those who, like you, obey--but too well. As a proof,
remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come to me,
and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very night."

That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme. Bonacieux took
place. D'Artagnan trembled; and he likewise recollected that during the
past half hour the poor woman had passed close to him, without doubt
carried away by the same power that had caused her disappearance.

"In short," continued the cardinal, "as I have heard nothing of you for
some time past, I wished to know what you were doing. Besides, you owe
me some thanks. You must yourself have remarked how much you have been
considered in all the circumstances."

D'Artagnan bowed with respect.

"That," continued the cardinal, "arose not only from a feeling of
natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have marked out with respect
to you."

D'Artagnan became more and more astonished.

"I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first
invitation; but you did not come. Fortunately, nothing is lost by this
delay, and you are now about to hear it. Sit down there, before me,
d'Artagnan; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing." And the
cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man, who was
so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from his
interlocutor before he obeyed.

"You are brave, Monsieur d'Artagnan," continued his Eminence; "you are
prudent, which is still better. I like men of head and heart. Don't be
afraid," said he, smiling. "By men of heart I mean men of courage. But
young as you are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have
powerful enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy you."

"Alas, monseigneur!" replied the young man, "very easily, no doubt, for
they are strong and well supported, while I am alone."

"Yes, that's true; but alone as you are, you have done much already, and
will do still more, I don't doubt. Yet you have need, I believe, to be
guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken; for, if I mistake
not, you came to Paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune."

"I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur," said d'Artagnan.

"There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a
man of understanding. Now, what would you say to an ensign's commission
in my Guards, and a company after the campaign?"

"Ah, monseigneur."

"You accept it, do you not?"

"Monseigneur," replied d'Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.

"How? You refuse?" cried the cardinal, with astonishment.

"I am in his Majesty's Guards, monseigneur, and I have no reason to be
dissatisfied."

"But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also his Majesty's
Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps serves the king."

"Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words."

"You want a pretext, do you not? I comprehend. Well, you have this
excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the opportunity which I offer
you--so much for the world. As regards yourself, the need of protection;
for it is fit you should know, Monsieur d'Artagnan, that I have received
heavy and serious complaints against you. You do not consecrate your
days and nights wholly to the king's service."

D'Artagnan colored.

"In fact," said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle of papers,
"I have here a whole pile which concerns you. I know you to be a man of
resolution; and your services, well directed, instead of leading you to
ill, might be very advantageous to you. Come; reflect, and decide."

"Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur," replied d'Artagnan, "and I am
conscious of a greatness of soul in your Eminence that makes me mean as
an earthworm; but since Monseigneur permits me to speak freely--"

D'Artagnan paused.

"Yes; speak."

"Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in the king's
Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivable fatality my enemies
are in the service of your Eminence; I should, therefore, be ill
received here and ill regarded there if I accepted what Monseigneur
offers me."

"Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have not yet made
you an offer equal to your value?" asked the cardinal, with a smile of
disdain.

"Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to me; and on
the contrary, I think I have not proved myself worthy of your goodness.
The siege of La Rochelle is about to be resumed, monseigneur. I shall
serve under the eye of your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to
conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention,
then I shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify
the protection with which you honor me. Everything is best in its time,
monseigneur. Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of giving
myself; at present I shall appear to sell myself."

"That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur," said the cardinal,
with a tone of vexation, through which, however, might be seen a sort of
esteem; "remain free, then, and guard your hatreds and your sympathies."

"Monseigneur--"

"Well, well," said the cardinal, "I don't wish you any ill; but you must
be aware that it is quite trouble enough to defend and recompense our
friends. We owe nothing to our enemies; and let me give you a piece of
advice; take care of yourself, Monsieur d'Artagnan, for from the moment
I withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an obolus for your
life."

"I will try to do so, monseigneur," replied the Gascon, with a noble
confidence.

"Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if any mischance
should happen to you," said Richelieu, significantly, "that it was I who
came to seek you, and that I did all in my power to prevent this
misfortune befalling you."

"I shall entertain, whatever may happen," said d'Artagnan, placing his
hand upon his breast and bowing, "an eternal gratitude toward your
Eminence for that which you now do for me."

"Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieur d'Artagnan; we shall
see each other again after the campaign. I will have my eye upon you,
for I shall be there," replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to
a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, "and on our return, well--we
will settle our account!"

"Young man," said Richelieu, "if I shall be able to say to you at
another time what I have said to you today, I promise you to do so."

This last expression of Richelieu's conveyed a terrible doubt; it
alarmed d'Artagnan more than a menace would have done, for it was a
warning. The cardinal, then, was seeking to preserve him from some
misfortune which threatened him. He opened his mouth to reply, but with
a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him.

D'Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed him, and he
felt inclined to return. Then the noble and severe countenance of Athos
crossed his mind; if he made the compact with the cardinal which he
required, Athos would no more give him his hand--Athos would renounce
him.

It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the influence of a
truly great character on all that surrounds it.

D'Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered, and found
Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his appearance, and beginning to
grow uneasy. With a word, d'Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to
inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, as
his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.

Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired eagerly the cause
of the strange interview; but d'Artagnan confined himself to telling
them that M. de Richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter
into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.

"And you were right," cried Aramis and Porthos, with one voice.

Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing. But when they
were alone he said, "You have done that which you ought to have done,
d'Artagnan; but perhaps you have been wrong."

D'Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a secret voice of
his soul, which told him that great misfortunes awaited him.

The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure.
D'Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville. At that time it was
believed that the separation of the Musketeers and the Guards would be
but momentary, the king holding his Parliament that very day and
proposing to set out the day after. M. de Treville contented himself
with asking d'Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but d'Artagnan
answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.

That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards of M.
Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de Treville who had been
accustomed to associate together. They were parting to meet again when
it pleased God, and if it pleased God. That night, then, was somewhat
riotous, as may be imagined. In such cases extreme preoccupation is only
to be combated by extreme carelessness.

At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated; the
Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. de Treville, the Guards to that
of M. Dessessart. Each of the captains then led his company to the
Louvre, where the king held his review.

The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little from his
usual lofty bearing. In fact, the evening before, a fever had seized him
in the midst of the Parliament, while he was holding his Bed of Justice.
He had, not the less, decided upon setting out that same evening; and in
spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persisted in
having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance to conquer the
disease which began to lay hold upon him.

The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their march, the
Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed Porthos time to go and
take a turn in his superb equipment in the Rue aux Ours.

The procurator's wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine
horse. She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus; she made
him a sign to dismount and come to her. Porthos was magnificent; his
spurs jingled, his cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against
his ample limbs. This time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh,
such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.

The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose little gray eyes
sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new. Nevertheless,
one thing afforded him inward consolation; it was expected by everybody
that the campaign would be a severe one. He whispered a hope to himself
that this beloved relative might be killed in the field.

Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade him farewell. M.
Coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities. As to Mme. Coquenard,
she could not restrain her tears; but no evil impressions were taken
from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her
relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with
her husband.

But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard's chamber; they were
heartrending.

As long as the procurator's wife could follow him with her eyes, she
waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out of the window as to
lead people to believe she wished to precipitate herself. Porthos
received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such
demonstrations, only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his
hat gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.

On his part Aramis wrote a long letter. To whom? Nobody knew. Kitty, who
was to set out that evening for Tours, was waiting in the next chamber.

Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.

In the meantime d'Artagnan was defiling with his company. Arriving at
the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round to look gaily at the Bastille;
but as it was the Bastille alone he looked at, he did not observe
Milady, who, mounted upon a light chestnut horse, designated him with
her finger to two ill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to take
notice of him. To a look of interrogation which they made, Milady
replied by a sign that it was he. Then, certain that there could be no
mistake in the execution of her orders, she started her horse and
disappeared.

The two men followed the company, and on leaving the Faubourg St.
Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped, which a servant without
livery had waiting for them.





41 THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE


The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the
reign of Louis XIII, and one of the great military enterprises of the
cardinal. It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should say
a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege are
connected in too important a manner with the story we have undertaken to
relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.

The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
extensive. Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private
plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the
others.

Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to the Huguenots as places
of safety, there only remained La Rochelle. It became necessary,
therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven
with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
mingling.

Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all
nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first
summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves
like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
of Europe.

La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the
other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and
ambition. Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open
to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy,
the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.

Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--Protestant
by conviction and Catholic as commander of the order of the Holy Ghost;
Bassompierre, who was a German by birth and a Frenchman at heart--in
short, Bassompierre, who had a distinguished command at the siege of La
Rochelle, said, in charging at the head of several other Protestant
nobles like himself, "You will see, gentlemen, that we shall be fools
enough to take La Rochelle."

And Bassompierre was right. The cannonade of the Isle of Re presaged to
him the dragonnades of the Cevennes; the taking of La Rochelle was the
preface to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

We have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and
simplifying minister, which belong to history, the chronicler is forced
to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival.

Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen. Was this love a
simple political affair, or was it naturally one of those profound
passions which Anne of Austria inspired in those who approached her?
That we are not able to say; but at all events, we have seen, by the
anterior developments of this story, that Buckingham had the advantage
over him, and in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the
diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers
and the courage and conduct of d'Artagnan, cruelly mystified him.

It was, then, Richelieu's object, not only to get rid of an enemy of
France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this vengeance must be
grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his
hand, as his weapon for combat, the forces of a kingdom.

Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated Buckingham; that in
triumphing over England he triumphed over Buckingham--in short, that in
humiliating England in the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in
the eyes of the queen.

On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor of England,
was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal. Buckingham
also was pursuing a private vengeance. Buckingham could not under any
pretense be admitted into France as an ambassador; he wished to enter it
as a conqueror.

It resulted from this that the real stake in this game, which two most
powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men, was
simply a kind look from Anne of Austria.

The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham. Arriving unexpectedly
in sight of the Isle of Re with ninety vessels and nearly twenty
thousand men, he had surprised the Comte de Toiras, who commanded for
the king in the Isle, and he had, after a bloody conflict, effected his
landing.

Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the Baron de
Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen
months old, and that this little girl was afterward Mme. de Sevigne.

The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin with his
garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of
La Pree.

This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and till the
king and he could take the command of the siege of La Rochelle, which
was determined, he had sent Monsieur to direct the first operations, and
had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the
theater of war. It was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our
friend d'Artagnan formed a part.

The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed of Justice
had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the
twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself attacked by fever. He was,
notwithstanding, anxious to set out; but his illness becoming more
serious, he was forced to stop at Villeroy.

Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted. It followed that
d'Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply in the Guards, found
himself, for the time at least, separated from his good friends--Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis. This separation, which was no more than an
unpleasant circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious
uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown dangers he was
surrounded.

He, however, arrived without accident in the camp established before La
Rochelle, on the tenth of the month of September of the year 1627.

Everything was in the same state. The Duke of Buckingham and his
English, masters of the Isle of Re, continued to besiege, but without
success, the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree; and hostilities
with La Rochelle had commenced, two or three days before, about a fort
which the Duc d'Angouleme had caused to be constructed near the city.

The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took up their quarters
at the Minimes; but, as we know, d'Artagnan, possessed with ambition to
enter the Musketeers, had formed but few friendships among his comrades,
and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own reflections.

His reflections were not very cheerful. From the time of his arrival in
Paris, he had been mixed up with public affairs; but his own private
affairs had made no great progress, either in love or fortune. As to
love, the only woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to discover what had
become of her. As to fortune, he had made--he, humble as he was--an
enemy of the cardinal; that is to say, of a man before whom trembled the
greatest men of the kingdom, beginning with the king.

That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not done so. For a
mind so perspicuous as that of d'Artagnan, this indulgence was a light
by which he caught a glimpse of a better future.

Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared, he thought;
but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to be despised. This enemy
was Milady.

In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and good will
of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an
additional cause of persecution, and her protection, as it was known,
protected badly--as witness Chalais and Mme. Bonacieux.

What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond, worth five or
six thousand livres, which he wore on his finger; and even this
diamond--supposing that d'Artagnan, in his projects of ambition, wished
to keep it, to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the
queen--had not in the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more
value than the gravel he trod under his feet.

We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for d'Artagnan made these
reflections while walking solitarily along a pretty little road which
led from the camp to the village of Angoutin. Now, these reflections had
led him further than he intended, and the day was beginning to decline
when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the barrel
of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.

D'Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding. He comprehended
that the musket had not come there of itself, and that he who bore it
had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions.
He determined, therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he
could when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock, he
perceived the extremity of another musket.

This was evidently an ambuscade.

The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw, with a certain
degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in his direction; but as soon
as he perceived that the orifice of the barrel was motionless, he threw
himself upon the ground. At the same instant the gun was fired, and he
heard the whistling of a ball pass over his head.

No time was to be lost. D'Artagnan sprang up with a bound, and at the
same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the
very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the
ground.

D'Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous
death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a
single step. Besides, courage was out of the question here; d'Artagnan
had fallen into an ambush.

"If there is a third shot," said he to himself, "I am a lost man."

He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward the camp,
with the swiftness of the young men of his country, so renowned for
their agility; but whatever might be his speed, the first who fired,
having had time to reload, fired a second shot, and this time so well
aimed that it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.

As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he ran, and
arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath. He sat down
without saying a word to anybody, and began to reflect.

This event might have three causes:

The first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the
Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill one of his Majesty's Guards,
because it would be an enemy the less, and this enemy might have a
well-furnished purse in his pocket.

D'Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball, and shook
his head. The ball was not a musket ball--it was an arquebus ball. The
accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon
had been employed. This could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the
ball was not of the regular caliber.

This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal. It may be
observed that at the very moment when, thanks to the ray of the sun, he
perceived the gun barrel, he was thinking with astonishment on the
forbearance of his Eminence with respect to him.

But d'Artagnan again shook his head. For people toward whom he had but
to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely recourse to such means.

It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.

He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the assassins; he had
escaped so rapidly that he had not had leisure to notice anything.

"Ah, my poor friends!" murmured d'Artagnan; "where are you? And that you
should fail me!"

D'Artagnan passed a very bad night. Three or four times he started up,
imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of stabbing
him. Nevertheless, day dawned without darkness having brought any
accident.

But d'Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not
relinquished.

D'Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a reason to
himself that the weather was bad.

At nine o'clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms. The Duc
d'Orleans visited the posts. The guards were under arms, and d'Artagnan
took his place in the midst of his comrades.

Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the superior
officers approached him to pay their compliments, M. Dessessart, captain
of the Guards, as well as the others.

At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to d'Artagnan that M.
Dessessart made him a sign to approach. He waited for a fresh gesture on
the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this
gesture being repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive
orders.

"Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a dangerous
mission, but one which will do honor to those who shall accomplish it;
and I made you a sign in order that you might hold yourself in
readiness."

"Thanks, my captain!" replied d'Artagnan, who wished for nothing better
than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the
lieutenant general.

In fact the Rochellais had made a sortie during the night, and had
retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained possession two days
before. The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the enemy
guarded this bastion.

At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and said, "I want
for this mission three or four volunteers, led by a man who can be
depended upon."

"As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my hand, monsieur,"
said M. Dessessart, pointing to d'Artagnan; "and as to the four or five
volunteers, Monsieur has but to make his intentions known, and the men
will not be wanting."

"Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!" said
d'Artagnan, raising his sword.

Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two
other soldiers having joined them, the number was deemed sufficient.
D'Artagnan declined all others, being unwilling to take the first chance
from those who had the priority.

It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion, the
Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it; the object then
was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports.

D'Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed the trench;
the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the two soldiers followed
behind.

They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench, till they came
within a hundred paces of the bastion. There, on turning round,
d'Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.

He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed behind, and he
continued to advance.

At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about
sixty paces of the bastion. They saw no one, and the bastion seemed
abandoned.

The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they
should proceed any further, when all at once a circle of smoke enveloped
the giant of stone, and a dozen balls came whistling around d'Artagnan
and his companions.

They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded. A longer
stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
D'Artagnan and his two companions turned their backs, and commenced a
retreat which resembled a flight.

On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a
rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell. A ball had passed through his
breast. The other, who was safe and sound, continued his way toward the
camp.

D'Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus, and stooped to
raise him and assist him in regaining the lines; but at this moment two
shots were fired. One ball struck the head of the already-wounded guard,
and the other flattened itself against a rock, after having passed
within two inches of d'Artagnan.

The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could not have come
from the bastion, which was hidden by the angle of the trench. The idea
of the two soldiers who had abandoned him occurred to his mind, and with
them he remembered the assassins of two evenings before. He resolved
this time to know with whom he had to deal, and fell upon the body of
his comrade as if he were dead.

He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty
paces of him; they were the heads of the two soldiers. D'Artagnan had
not been deceived; these two men had only followed for the purpose of
assassinating him, hoping that the young man's death would be placed to
the account of the enemy.

As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime, they came up
to him with the purpose of making sure. Fortunately, deceived by
d'Artagnan's trick, they neglected to reload their guns.

When they were within ten paces of him, d'Artagnan, who in falling had
taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up close to them.

The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without
having killed their man, they should be accused by him; therefore their
first idea was to join the enemy. One of them took his gun by the
barrel, and used it as he would a club. He aimed a terrible blow at
d'Artagnan, who avoided it by springing to one side; but by this
movement he left a passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward the
bastion. As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of the
intentions of the man they saw coming toward them, they fired upon him,
and he fell, struck by a ball which broke his shoulder.

Meantime d'Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier, attacking
him with his sword. The conflict was not long; the wretch had nothing to
defend himself with but his discharged arquebus. The sword of the
Guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passed
through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.

D'Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat.

"Oh, do not kill me!" cried the bandit. "Pardon, pardon, my officer, and
I will tell you all."

"Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it?"
asked the young man, withholding his arm.

"Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty, as you
are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you
are."

"Wretch," cried d'Artagnan, "speak quickly! Who employed you to
assassinate me?"

"A woman whom I don't know, but who is called Milady."

"But if you don't know this woman, how do you know her name?"

"My comrade knows her, and called her so. It was with him she agreed,
and not with me; he even has in his pocket a letter from that person,
who attaches great importance to you, as I have heard him say."

"But how did you become concerned in this villainous affair?"

"He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed."

"And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?"

"A hundred louis."

"Well, come!" said the young man, laughing, "she thinks I am worth
something. A hundred louis? Well, that was a temptation for two wretches
like you. I understand why you accepted it, and I grant you my pardon;
but upon one condition."

"What is that?" said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that all was not
over.

"That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his
pocket."

"But," cried the bandit, "that is only another way of killing me. How
can I go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion?"

"You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it, or I swear
you shall die by my hand."

"Pardon, monsieur; pity! In the name of that young lady you love, and
whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!" cried the bandit,
throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand--for he began
to lose his strength with his blood.

"And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and that I
believed that woman dead?" asked d'Artagnan.

"By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket."

"You see, then," said d'Artagnan, "that I must have that letter. So no
more delay, no more hesitation; or else whatever may be my repugnance to
soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you, I
swear by my faith as an honest man--" and at these words d'Artagnan made
so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.

"Stop, stop!" cried he, regaining strength by force of terror. "I will
go--I will go!"

D'Artagnan took the soldier's arquebus, made him go on before him, and
urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword.

It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long track of
blood on the ground he passed over, pale with approaching death, trying
to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice,
which lay twenty paces from him.

Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a cold sweat,
that d'Artagnan took pity on him, and casting upon him a look of
contempt, "Stop," said he, "I will show you the difference between a man
of courage and such a coward as you. Stay where you are; I will go
myself."

And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the movements of
the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents of the ground,
d'Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second soldier.

There were two means of gaining his object--to search him on the spot,
or to carry him away, making a buckler of his body, and search him in
the trench.

D'Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the assassin onto his
shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.

A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the
flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony, proved to d'Artagnan that the
would-be assassin had saved his life.

D'Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside the wounded
man, who was as pale as death.

Then he began to search. A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was
evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received, with a dice
box and dice, completed the possessions of the dead man.

He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to the wounded
man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.

Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter, that which
he had sought at the risk of his life:

"Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in the
convent, which you should never have allowed her to reach, try, at
least, not to miss the man. If you do, you know that my hand stretches
far, and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have
from me."

No signature. Nevertheless it was plain the letter came from Milady. He
consequently kept it as a piece of evidence, and being in safety behind
the angle of the trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man. He
confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade--the same who was
killed--to carry off a young woman who was to leave Paris by the
Barriere de La Villette; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret, they
had missed the carriage by ten minutes.

"But what were you to do with that woman?" asked d'Artagnan, with
anguish.

"We were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the Place Royale," said the
wounded man.

"Yes, yes!" murmured d'Artagnan; "that's the place--Milady's own
residence!"

Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for
vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as well as all who loved
him, and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court,
since she had discovered all. There could be no doubt she owed this
information to the cardinal.

But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy, that the
queen must have discovered the prison in which poor Mme. Bonacieux was
explaining her devotion, and that she had freed her from that prison;
and the letter he had received from the young woman, and her passage
along the road of Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.

Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.

This idea completely restored clemency to his heart. He turned toward
the wounded man, who had watched with intense anxiety all the various
expressions of his countenance, and holding out his arm to him, said,
"Come, I will not abandon you thus. Lean upon me, and let us return to
the camp."

"Yes," said the man, who could scarcely believe in such magnanimity,
"but is it not to have me hanged?"

"You have my word," said he; "for the second time I give you your life."

The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feet of his
preserver; but d'Artagnan, who had no longer a motive for staying so
near the enemy, abridged the testimonials of his gratitude.

The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the
death of his four companions. They were therefore much astonished and
delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe and
sound.

D'Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a sortie which
he improvised. He described the death of the other soldier, and the
perils they had encountered. This recital was for him the occasion of
veritable triumph. The whole army talked of this expedition for a day,
and Monsieur paid him his compliments upon it. Besides this, as every
great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit of
d'Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost.
In fact, d'Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his
two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests.

This tranquillity proved one thing--that d'Artagnan did not yet know
Milady.





42 THE ANJOU WINE


After the most disheartening news of the king's health, a report of his
convalescence began to prevail in the camp; and as he was very anxious
to be in person at the siege, it was said that as soon as he could mount
a horse he would set forward.

Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other he might
expect to be removed from his command by the Duc d'Angouleme, by
Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all eager for his post, did but
little, lost his days in wavering, and did not dare to attempt any great
enterprise to drive the English from the Isle of Re, where they still
besieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree, as on their
side the French were besieging La Rochelle.

D'Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as always happens
after a past danger, particularly when the danger seems to have
vanished. He only felt one uneasiness, and that was at not hearing any
tidings from his friends.

But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything
was explained to him by this letter, dated from Villeroy:

M d'Artagnan,

MM Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having had an entertainment at my
house and enjoying themselves very much, created such a disturbance that
the provost of the castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined
for some days; but I accomplish the order they have given me by
forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, with which they are
much pleased. They are desirous that you should drink to their health in
their favorite wine. I have done this, and am, monsieur, with great
respect,

Your very humble and obedient servant,

Godeau, Purveyor of the Musketeers

"That's all well!" cried d'Artagnan. "They think of me in their
pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles. Well, I will certainly
drink to their health with all my heart, but I will not drink alone."

And d'Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had formed
greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them to enjoy with him
this present of delicious Anjou wine which had been sent him from
Villeroy.

One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and another the next,
so the meeting was fixed for the day after that.

D'Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the
refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders that great care
should be taken of it; and then, on the day appointed, as the dinner was
fixed for midday d'Artagnan sent Planchet at nine in the morning to
assist in preparing everything for the entertainment.

Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity of landlord, thought
he would make all ready, like an intelligent man; and with this view
called in the assistance of the lackey of one of his master's guests,
named Fourreau, and the false soldier who had tried to kill d'Artagnan
and who, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service of
d'Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after d'Artagnan had saved his life.

The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived, took their
places, and the dishes were arranged on the table. Planchet waited,
towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was
the name of the convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken
by its journey, carefully into decanters. Of this wine, the first bottle
being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont poured the lees into a
glass, and d'Artagnan desired him to drink it, for the poor devil had
not yet recovered his strength.

The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift the first glass of
wine to their lips, when all at once the cannon sounded from Fort Louis
and Fort Neuf. The Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some
unexpected attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to
their swords. D'Artagnan, not less forward than they, did likewise, and
all ran out, in order to repair to their posts.

But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of
the cause of this noise. Cries of "Live the king! Live the cardinal!"
resounded on every side, and the drums were beaten in all directions.

In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by forced
marches, and had that moment arrived with all his household and a
reinforcement of ten thousand troops. His Musketeers proceeded and
followed him. D'Artagnan, placed in line with his company, saluted with
an expressive gesture his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him,
and M. de Treville, who detected him at once.

The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon in one
another's arms.

"Pardieu!" cried d'Artagnan, "you could not have arrived in better time;
the dinner cannot have had time to get cold! Can it, gentlemen?" added
the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to his
friends.

"Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "it appears we are feasting!"

"I hope," said Aramis, "there are no women at your dinner."

"Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?" asked Athos.

"Well, pardieu! there is yours, my dear friend," replied d'Artagnan.

"Our wine!" said Athos, astonished.

"Yes, that you sent me."

"We sent you wine?"

"You know very well--the wine from the hills of Anjou."

"Yes, I know what brand you are talking about."

"The wine you prefer."

"Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must content
yourselves with that."

"And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you some Anjou
wine?" said Porthos.

"Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order."

"On our account?" said the three Musketeers.

"Did you send this wine, Aramis?" said Athos.

"No; and you, Porthos?"

"No; and you, Athos?"

"No!"

"If it was not you, it was your purveyor," said d'Artagnan.

"Our purveyor!"

"Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the Musketeers."

"My faith! never mind where it comes from," said Porthos, "let us taste
it, and if it is good, let us drink it."

"No," said Athos; "don't let us drink wine which comes from an unknown
source."

"You are right, Athos," said d'Artagnan. "Did none of you charge your
purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?"

"No! And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?"

"Here is his letter," said d'Artagnan, and he presented the note to his
comrades.

"This is not his writing!" said Athos. "I am acquainted with it; before
we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of the regiment."

"A false letter altogether," said Porthos, "we have not been
disciplined."

"d'Artagnan," said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, "how could you believe
that we had made a disturbance?"

D'Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs.

"Thou alarmest me!" said Athos, who never used thee and thou but upon
very particular occasions, "what has happened?"

"Look you, my friends!" cried d'Artagnan, "a horrible suspicion crosses
my mind! Can this be another vengeance of that woman?"

It was now Athos who turned pale.

D'Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three Musketeers and
the two Guards following him.

The first object that met the eyes of d'Artagnan on entering the room
was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible
convulsions.

Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give him succor;
but it was plain that all assistance was useless--all the features of
the dying man were distorted with agony.

"Ah!" cried he, on perceiving d'Artagnan, "ah! this is frightful! You
pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!"

"I!" cried d'Artagnan. "I, wretch? What do you say?"

"I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that it was you who
desired me to drink it. I say you wished to avenge yourself on me, and I
say that it is horrible!"

"Do not think so, Brisemont," said d'Artagnan; "do not think so. I swear
to you, I protest--"

"Oh, but God is above! God will punish you! My God, grant that he may
one day suffer what I suffer!"

"Upon the Gospel," said d'Artagnan, throwing himself down by the dying
man, "I swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that I was going to
drink of it as you did."

"I do not believe you," cried the soldier, and he expired amid horrible
tortures.

"Frightful! frightful!" murmured Athos, while Porthos broke the bottles
and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that a confessor should be
sent for.

"Oh, my friends," said d'Artagnan, "you come once more to save my life,
not only mine but that of these gentlemen. Gentlemen," continued he,
addressing the Guardsmen, "I request you will be silent with regard to
this adventure. Great personages may have had a hand in what you have
seen, and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us."

"Ah, monsieur!" stammered Planchet, more dead than alive, "ah, monsieur,
what an escape I have had!"

"How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?"

"To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink a small glass
of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called."

"Alas!" said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror, "I wanted to
get him out of the way that I might drink myself."

"Gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, "you may easily
comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken
place; so accept my excuses, and put off the party till another day, I
beg of you."

The two Guardsmen courteously accepted d'Artagnan's excuses, and
perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone, retired.

When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were without
witnesses, they looked at one another with an air which plainly
expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation.

"In the first place," said Athos, "let us leave this chamber; the dead
are not agreeable company, particularly when they have died a violent
death."

"Planchet," said d'Artagnan, "I commit the corpse of this poor devil to
your care. Let him be interred in holy ground. He committed a crime, it
is true; but he repented of it."

And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and Fourreau the
duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.

The host gave them another chamber, and served them with fresh eggs and
some water, which Athos went himself to draw at the fountain. In a few
words, Porthos and Aramis were posted as to the situation.

"Well," said d'Artagnan to Athos, "you see, my dear friend, that this is
war to the death."

Athos shook his head.

"Yes, yes," replied he, "I perceive that plainly; but do you really
believe it is she?"

"I am sure of it."

"Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt."

"But the fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?"

"She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime in France, and has
been branded in consequence."

"Athos, she is your wife, I tell you," repeated d'Artagnan; "only
reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each other."

"Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hanged her so
effectually."

It was d'Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn.

"But in either case, what is to be done?" said the young man.

"The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging eternally
over his head," said Athos. "We must extricate ourselves from this
position."

"But how?"

"Listen! You must try to see her, and have an explanation with her. Say
to her: 'Peace or war! My word as a gentleman never to say anything of
you, never to do anything against you; on your side, a solemn oath to
remain neutral with respect to me. If not, I will apply to the
chancellor, I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, I
will move the courts against you, I will denounce you as branded, I will
bring you to trial; and if you are acquitted, well, by the faith of a
gentleman, I will kill you at the corner of some wall, as I would a mad
dog.'"

"I like the means well enough," said d'Artagnan, "but where and how to
meet with her?"

"Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity; opportunity is the
martingale of man. The more we have ventured the more we gain, when we
know how to wait."

"Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners."

"Bah!" said Athos. "God has preserved us hitherto, God will preserve us
still."

"Yes, we. Besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot
to risk our lives; but she," asked he, in an undertone.

"What she?" asked Athos.

"Constance."

"Madame Bonacieux! Ah, that's true!" said Athos. "My poor friend, I had
forgotten you were in love."

"Well, but," said Aramis, "have you not learned by the letter you found
on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent? One may be very
comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of La Rochelle is
terminated, I promise you on my part--"

"Good," cried Athos, "good! Yes, my dear Aramis, we all know that your
views have a religious tendency."

"I am only temporarily a Musketeer," said Aramis, humbly.

"It is some time since we heard from his mistress," said Athos, in a low
voice. "But take no notice; we know all about that."

"Well," said Porthos, "it appears to me that the means are very simple."

"What?" asked d'Artagnan.

"You say she is in a convent?" replied Porthos.

"Yes."

"Very well. As soon as the siege is over, we'll carry her off from that
convent."

"But we must first learn what convent she is in."

"That's true," said Porthos.

"But I think I have it," said Athos. "Don't you say, dear d'Artagnan,
that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?"

"I believe so, at least."

"In that case Porthos will assist us."

"And how so, if you please?"

"Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess. She must have a
long arm."

"Hush!" said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips. "I believe her to be
a cardinalist; she must know nothing of the matter."

"Then," said Aramis, "I take upon myself to obtain intelligence of her."

"You, Aramis?" cried the three friends. "You! And how?"

"By the queen's almoner, to whom I am very intimately allied," said
Aramis, coloring.

And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished their modest
repast, separated, with the promise of meeting again that evening.
D'Artagnan returned to less important affairs, and the three Musketeers
repaired to the king's quarters, where they had to prepare their
lodging.





