4 THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE HANDKERCHIEF OF ARAMIS


D'Artagnan, in a state of fury, crossed the antechamber at three bounds,
and was darting toward the stairs, which he reckoned upon descending
four at a time, when, in his heedless course, he ran head foremost
against a Musketeer who was coming out of one of M. de Treville's
private rooms, and striking his shoulder violently, made him utter a
cry, or rather a howl.

"Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course, "excuse
me, but I am in a hurry."

Scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of iron seized
him by the belt and stopped him.

"You are in a hurry?" said the Musketeer, as pale as a sheet. "Under
that pretense you run against me! You say, 'Excuse me,' and you believe
that is sufficient? Not at all, my young man. Do you fancy because you
have heard Monsieur de Treville speak to us a little cavalierly today
that other people are to treat us as he speaks to us? Undeceive
yourself, comrade, you are not Monsieur de Treville."

"My faith!" replied d'Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after the
dressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his own apartment. "I
did not do it intentionally, and not doing it intentionally, I said
'Excuse me.' It appears to me that this is quite enough. I repeat to
you, however, and this time on my word of honor--I think perhaps too
often--that I am in haste, great haste. Leave your hold, then, I beg of
you, and let me go where my business calls me."

"Monsieur," said Athos, letting him go, "you are not polite; it is easy
to perceive that you come from a distance."

D'Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but at Athos's
last remark he stopped short.

"MORBLEU, monsieur!" said he, "however far I may come, it is not you who
can give me a lesson in good manners, I warn you."

"Perhaps," said Athos.

"Ah! If I were not in such haste, and if I were not running after
someone," said d'Artagnan.

"Monsieur Man-in-a-hurry, you can find me without running--ME, you
understand?"

"And where, I pray you?"

"Near the Carmes-Deschaux."

"At what hour?"

"About noon."

"About noon? That will do; I will be there."

"Endeavor not to make me wait; for at quarter past twelve I will cut off
your ears as you run."

"Good!" cried d'Artagnan, "I will be there ten minutes before twelve."
And he set off running as if the devil possessed him, hoping that he
might yet find the stranger, whose slow pace could not have carried him
far.

But at the street gate, Porthos was talking with the soldier on guard.
Between the two talkers there was just enough room for a man to pass.
D'Artagnan thought it would suffice for him, and he sprang forward like
a dart between them. But d'Artagnan had reckoned without the wind. As he
was about to pass, the wind blew out Porthos's long cloak, and
d'Artagnan rushed straight into the middle of it. Without doubt, Porthos
had reasons for not abandoning this part of his vestments, for instead
of quitting his hold on the flap in his hand, he pulled it toward him,
so that d'Artagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by a movement of
rotation explained by the persistency of Porthos.

D'Artagnan, hearing the Musketeer swear, wished to escape from the
cloak, which blinded him, and sought to find his way from under the
folds of it. He was particularly anxious to avoid marring the freshness
of the magnificent baldric we are acquainted with; but on timidly
opening his eyes, he found himself with his nose fixed between the two
shoulders of Porthos--that is to say, exactly upon the baldric.

Alas, like most things in this world which have nothing in their favor
but appearances, the baldric was glittering with gold in the front, but
was nothing but simple buff behind. Vainglorious as he was, Porthos
could not afford to have a baldric wholly of gold, but had at least
half. One could comprehend the necessity of the cold and the urgency of
the cloak.

"Bless me!" cried Porthos, making strong efforts to disembarrass himself
of d'Artagnan, who was wriggling about his back; "you must be mad to run
against people in this manner."

"Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, reappearing under the shoulder of the
giant, "but I am in such haste--I was running after someone and--"

"And do you always forget your eyes when you run?" asked Porthos.

"No," replied d'Artagnan, piqued, "and thanks to my eyes, I can see what
other people cannot see."

Whether Porthos understood him or did not understand him, giving way to
his anger, "Monsieur," said he, "you stand a chance of getting chastised
if you rub Musketeers in this fashion."

"Chastised, Monsieur!" said d'Artagnan, "the expression is strong."

"It is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies in the
face."

"Ah, PARDIEU! I know full well that you don't turn your back to yours."

And the young man, delighted with his joke, went away laughing loudly.

Porthos foamed with rage, and made a movement to rush after d'Artagnan.

"Presently, presently," cried the latter, "when you haven't your cloak
on."

"At one o'clock, then, behind the Luxembourg."

"Very well, at one o'clock, then," replied d'Artagnan, turning the angle
of the street.

But neither in the street he had passed through, nor in the one which
his eager glance pervaded, could he see anyone; however slowly the
stranger had walked, he was gone on his way, or perhaps had entered some
house. D'Artagnan inquired of everyone he met with, went down to the
ferry, came up again by the Rue de Seine, and the Red Cross; but
nothing, absolutely nothing! This chase was, however, advantageous to
him in one sense, for in proportion as the perspiration broke from his
forehead, his heart began to cool.

He began to reflect upon the events that had passed; they were numerous
and inauspicious. It was scarcely eleven o'clock in the morning, and yet
this morning had already brought him into disgrace with M. de Treville,
who could not fail to think the manner in which d'Artagnan had left him
a little cavalier.

Besides this, he had drawn upon himself two good duels with two men,
each capable of killing three d'Artagnans--with two Musketeers, in
short, with two of those beings whom he esteemed so greatly that he
placed them in his mind and heart above all other men.

The outlook was sad. Sure of being killed by Athos, it may easily be
understood that the young man was not very uneasy about Porthos. As
hope, however, is the last thing extinguished in the heart of man, he
finished by hoping that he might survive, even though with terrible
wounds, in both these duels; and in case of surviving, he made the
following reprehensions upon his own conduct:

"What a madcap I was, and what a stupid fellow I am! That brave and
unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder against which I must
run head foremost, like a ram. The only thing that astonishes me is that
he did not strike me dead at once. He had good cause to do so; the pain
I gave him must have been atrocious. As to Porthos--oh, as to Porthos,
faith, that's a droll affair!"

And in spite of himself, the young man began to laugh aloud, looking
round carefully, however, to see that his solitary laugh, without a
cause in the eyes of passers-by, offended no one.

"As to Porthos, that is certainly droll; but I am not the less a giddy
fool. Are people to be run against without warning? No! And have I any
right to go and peep under their cloaks to see what is not there? He
would have pardoned me, he would certainly have pardoned me, if I had
not said anything to him about that cursed baldric--in ambiguous words,
it is true, but rather drolly ambiguous. Ah, cursed Gascon that I am, I
get from one hobble into another. Friend d'Artagnan," continued he,
speaking to himself with all the amenity that he thought due himself,
"if you escape, of which there is not much chance, I would advise you to
practice perfect politeness for the future. You must henceforth be
admired and quoted as a model of it. To be obliging and polite does not
necessarily make a man a coward. Look at Aramis, now; Aramis is mildness
and grace personified. Well, did anybody ever dream of calling Aramis a
coward? No, certainly not, and from this moment I will endeavor to model
myself after him. Ah! That's strange! Here he is!"

D'Artagnan, walking and soliloquizing, had arrived within a few steps of
the hotel d'Arguillon and in front of that hotel perceived Aramis,
chatting gaily with three gentlemen; but as he had not forgotten that it
was in presence of this young man that M. de Treville had been so angry
in the morning, and as a witness of the rebuke the Musketeers had
received was not likely to be at all agreeable, he pretended not to see
him. D'Artagnan, on the contrary, quite full of his plans of
conciliation and courtesy, approached the young men with a profound bow,
accompanied by a most gracious smile. All four, besides, immediately
broke off their conversation.

D'Artagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one too many;
but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of the gay world to
know how to extricate himself gallantly from a false position, like that
of a man who begins to mingle with people he is scarcely acquainted with
and in a conversation that does not concern him. He was seeking in his
mind, then, for the least awkward means of retreat, when he remarked
that Aramis had let his handkerchief fall, and by mistake, no doubt, had
placed his foot upon it. This appeared to be a favorable opportunity to
repair his intrusion. He stooped, and with the most gracious air he
could assume, drew the handkerchief from under the foot of the Musketeer
in spite of the efforts the latter made to detain it, and holding it out
to him, said, "I believe, monsieur, that this is a handkerchief you
would be sorry to lose?"

The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered, and had a coronet and
arms at one of its corners. Aramis blushed excessively, and snatched
rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of the Gascon.

"Ah, ah!" cried one of the Guards, "will you persist in saying, most
discreet Aramis, that you are not on good terms with Madame de
Bois-Tracy, when that gracious lady has the kindness to lend you one of
her handkerchiefs?"

Aramis darted at d'Artagnan one of those looks which inform a man that
he has acquired a mortal enemy. Then, resuming his mild air, "You are
deceived, gentlemen," said he, "this handkerchief is not mine, and I
cannot fancy why Monsieur has taken it into his head to offer it to me
rather than to one of you; and as a proof of what I say, here is mine in
my pocket."

So saying, he pulled out his own handkerchief, likewise a very elegant
handkerchief, and of fine cambric--though cambric was dear at the
period--but a handkerchief without embroidery and without arms, only
ornamented with a single cipher, that of its proprietor.

This time d'Artagnan was not hasty. He perceived his mistake; but the
friends of Aramis were not at all convinced by his denial, and one of
them addressed the young Musketeer with affected seriousness. "If it
were as you pretend it is," said he, "I should be forced, my dear
Aramis, to reclaim it myself; for, as you very well know, Bois-Tracy is
an intimate friend of mine, and I cannot allow the property of his wife
to be sported as a trophy."

"You make the demand badly," replied Aramis; "and while acknowledging
the justice of your reclamation, I refuse it on account of the form."

"The fact is," hazarded d'Artagnan, timidly, "I did not see the
handkerchief fall from the pocket of Monsieur Aramis. He had his foot
upon it, that is all; and I thought from having his foot upon it the
handkerchief was his."

"And you were deceived, my dear sir," replied Aramis, coldly, very
little sensible to the reparation. Then turning toward that one of the
guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-Tracy, "Besides,"
continued he, "I have reflected, my dear intimate of Bois-Tracy, that I
am not less tenderly his friend than you can possibly be; so that
decidedly this handkerchief is as likely to have fallen from your pocket
as mine."

"No, upon my honor!" cried his Majesty's Guardsman.

"You are about to swear upon your honor and I upon my word, and then it
will be pretty evident that one of us will have lied. Now, here,
Montaran, we will do better than that--let each take a half."

"Of the handkerchief?"

"Yes."

"Perfectly just," cried the other two Guardsmen, "the judgment of King
Solomon! Aramis, you certainly are full of wisdom!"

The young men burst into a laugh, and as may be supposed, the affair had
no other sequel. In a moment or two the conversation ceased, and the
three Guardsmen and the Musketeer, after having cordially shaken hands,
separated, the Guardsmen going one way and Aramis another.

"Now is my time to make peace with this gallant man," said d'Artagnan to
himself, having stood on one side during the whole of the latter part of
the conversation; and with this good feeling drawing near to Aramis, who
was departing without paying any attention to him, "Monsieur," said he,
"you will excuse me, I hope."

"Ah, monsieur," interrupted Aramis, "permit me to observe to you that
you have not acted in this affair as a gallant man ought."

"What, monsieur!" cried d'Artagnan, "and do you suppose--"

"I suppose, monsieur, that you are not a fool, and that you knew very
well, although coming from Gascony, that people do not tread upon
handkerchiefs without a reason. What the devil! Paris is not paved with
cambric!"

"Monsieur, you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me," said
d'Artagnan, in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speak more
loudly than his pacific resolutions. "I am from Gascony, it is true; and
since you know it, there is no occasion to tell you that Gascons are not
very patient, so that when they have begged to be excused once, were it
even for a folly, they are convinced that they have done already at
least as much again as they ought to have done."

"Monsieur, what I say to you about the matter," said Aramis, "is not for
the sake of seeking a quarrel. Thank God, I am not a bravo! And being a
Musketeer but for a time, I only fight when I am forced to do so, and
always with great repugnance; but this time the affair is serious, for
here is a lady compromised by you."

"By US, you mean!" cried d'Artagnan.

"Why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief?"

"Why did you so awkwardly let it fall?"

"I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief did not fall
from my pocket."

"And thereby you have lied twice, monsieur, for I saw it fall."

"Ah, you take it with that tone, do you, Master Gascon? Well, I will
teach you how to behave yourself."

"And I will send you back to your Mass book, Master Abbe. Draw, if you
please, and instantly--"

"Not so, if you please, my good friend--not here, at least. Do you not
perceive that we are opposite the Hotel d'Arguillon, which is full of
the cardinal's creatures? How do I know that this is not his Eminence
who has honored you with the commission to procure my head? Now, I
entertain a ridiculous partiality for my head, it seems to suit my
shoulders so correctly. I wish to kill you, be at rest as to that, but
to kill you quietly in a snug, remote place, where you will not be able
to boast of your death to anybody."

"I agree, monsieur; but do not be too confident. Take your handkerchief;
whether it belongs to you or another, you may perhaps stand in need of
it."

"Monsieur is a Gascon?" asked Aramis.

"Yes. Monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?"

"Prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless to Musketeers, I
know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as I am only a Musketeer
provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent. At two o'clock I shall have
the honor of expecting you at the hotel of Monsieur de Treville. There I
will indicate to you the best place and time."

The two young men bowed and separated, Aramis ascending the street which
led to the Luxembourg, while d'Artagnan, perceiving the appointed hour
was approaching, took the road to the Carmes-Deschaux, saying to
himself, "Decidedly I can't draw back; but at least, if I am killed, I
shall be killed by a Musketeer."





5 THE KING'S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL'S GUARDS


D'Artagnan was acquainted with nobody in Paris. He went therefore to his
appointment with Athos without a second, determined to be satisfied with
those his adversary should choose. Besides, his intention was formed to
make the brave Musketeer all suitable apologies, but without meanness or
weakness, fearing that might result from this duel which generally
results from an affair of this kind, when a young and vigorous man
fights with an adversary who is wounded and weakened--if conquered, he
doubles the triumph of his antagonist; if a conqueror, he is accused of
foul play and want of courage.

Now, we must have badly painted the character of our adventure seeker,
or our readers must have already perceived that d'Artagnan was not an
ordinary man; therefore, while repeating to himself that his death was
inevitable, he did not make up his mind to die quietly, as one less
courageous and less restrained might have done in his place. He
reflected upon the different characters of those with whom he was going
to fight, and began to view his situation more clearly. He hoped, by
means of loyal excuses, to make a friend of Athos, whose lordly air and
austere bearing pleased him much. He flattered himself he should be able
to frighten Porthos with the adventure of the baldric, which he might,
if not killed upon the spot, relate to everybody a recital which, well
managed, would cover Porthos with ridicule. As to the astute Aramis, he
did not entertain much dread of him; and supposing he should be able to
get so far, he determined to dispatch him in good style or at least, by
hitting him in the face, as Caesar recommended his soldiers do to those
of Pompey, to damage forever the beauty of which he was so proud.

In addition to this, d'Artagnan possessed that invincible stock of
resolution which the counsels of his father had implanted in his heart:
"Endure nothing from anyone but the king, the cardinal, and Monsieur de
Treville." He flew, then, rather than walked, toward the convent of the
Carmes Dechausses, or rather Deschaux, as it was called at that period,
a sort of building without a window, surrounded by barren fields--an
accessory to the Preaux-Clercs, and which was generally employed as the
place for the duels of men who had no time to lose.

When d'Artagnan arrived in sight of the bare spot of ground which
extended along the foot of the monastery, Athos had been waiting about
five minutes, and twelve o'clock was striking. He was, then, as punctual
as the Samaritan woman, and the most rigorous casuist with regard to
duels could have nothing to say.

Athos, who still suffered grievously from his wound, though it had been
dressed anew by M. de Treville's surgeon, was seated on a post and
waiting for his adversary with hat in hand, his feather even touching
the ground.

"Monsieur," said Athos, "I have engaged two of my friends as seconds;
but these two friends are not yet come, at which I am astonished, as it
is not at all their custom."

"I have no seconds on my part, monsieur," said d'Artagnan; "for having
only arrived yesterday in Paris, I as yet know no one but Monsieur de
Treville, to whom I was recommended by my father, who has the honor to
be, in some degree, one of his friends."

Athos reflected for an instant. "You know no one but Monsieur de
Treville?" he asked.

"Yes, monsieur, I know only him."

"Well, but then," continued Athos, speaking half to himself, "if I kill
you, I shall have the air of a boy-slayer."

"Not too much so," replied d'Artagnan, with a bow that was not deficient
in dignity, "since you do me the honor to draw a sword with me while
suffering from a wound which is very inconvenient."

"Very inconvenient, upon my word; and you hurt me devilishly, I can tell
you. But I will take the left hand--it is my custom in such
circumstances. Do not fancy that I do you a favor; I use either hand
easily. And it will be even a disadvantage to you; a left-handed man is
very troublesome to people who are not prepared for it. I regret I did
not inform you sooner of this circumstance."

"You have truly, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, bowing again, "a courtesy,
for which, I assure you, I am very grateful."

"You confuse me," replied Athos, with his gentlemanly air; "let us talk
of something else, if you please. Ah, s'blood, how you have hurt me! My
shoulder quite burns."

"If you would permit me--" said d'Artagnan, with timidity.

"What, monsieur?"

"I have a miraculous balsam for wounds--a balsam given to me by my
mother and of which I have made a trial upon myself."

"Well?"

"Well, I am sure that in less than three days this balsam would cure
you; and at the end of three days, when you would be cured--well, sir,
it would still do me a great honor to be your man."

D'Artagnan spoke these words with a simplicity that did honor to his
courtesy, without throwing the least doubt upon his courage.

"PARDIEU, monsieur!" said Athos, "that's a proposition that pleases me;
not that I can accept it, but a league off it savors of the gentleman.
Thus spoke and acted the gallant knights of the time of Charlemagne, in
whom every cavalier ought to seek his model. Unfortunately, we do not
live in the times of the great emperor, we live in the times of the
cardinal; and three days hence, however well the secret might be
guarded, it would be known, I say, that we were to fight, and our combat
would be prevented. I think these fellows will never come."

"If you are in haste, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, with the same
simplicity with which a moment before he had proposed to him to put off
the duel for three days, "and if it be your will to dispatch me at once,
do not inconvenience yourself, I pray you."

"There is another word which pleases me," cried Athos, with a gracious
nod to d'Artagnan. "That did not come from a man without a heart.
Monsieur, I love men of your kidney; and I foresee plainly that if we
don't kill each other, I shall hereafter have much pleasure in your
conversation. We will wait for these gentlemen, so please you; I have
plenty of time, and it will be more correct. Ah, here is one of them, I
believe."

In fact, at the end of the Rue Vaugirard the gigantic Porthos appeared.

"What!" cried d'Artagnan, "is your first witness Monsieur Porthos?"

"Yes, that disturbs you?"

"By no means."

"And here is the second."

D'Artagnan turned in the direction pointed to by Athos, and perceived
Aramis.

"What!" cried he, in an accent of greater astonishment than before,
"your second witness is Monsieur Aramis?"

"Doubtless! Are you not aware that we are never seen one without the
others, and that we are called among the Musketeers and the Guards, at
court and in the city, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, or the Three
Inseparables? And yet, as you come from Dax or Pau--"

"From Tarbes," said d'Artagnan.

"It is probable you are ignorant of this little fact," said Athos.

"My faith!" replied d'Artagnan, "you are well named, gentlemen; and my
adventure, if it should make any noise, will prove at least that your
union is not founded upon contrasts."

In the meantime, Porthos had come up, waved his hand to Athos, and then
turning toward d'Artagnan, stood quite astonished.

Let us say in passing that he had changed his baldric and relinquished
his cloak.

"Ah, ah!" said he, "what does this mean?"

"This is the gentleman I am going to fight with," said Athos, pointing
to d'Artagnan with his hand and saluting him with the same gesture.

"Why, it is with him I am also going to fight," said Porthos.

"But not before one o'clock," replied d'Artagnan.

"And I also am to fight with this gentleman," said Aramis, coming in his
turn onto the place.

"But not until two o'clock," said d'Artagnan, with the same calmness.

"But what are you going to fight about, Athos?" asked Aramis.

"Faith! I don't very well know. He hurt my shoulder. And you, Porthos?"

"Faith! I am going to fight--because I am going to fight," answered
Porthos, reddening.

Athos, whose keen eye lost nothing, perceived a faintly sly smile pass
over the lips of the young Gascon as he replied, "We had a short
discussion upon dress."

"And you, Aramis?" asked Athos.

"Oh, ours is a theological quarrel," replied Aramis, making a sign to
d'Artagnan to keep secret the cause of their duel.

Athos indeed saw a second smile on the lips of d'Artagnan.

"Indeed?" said Athos.

"Yes; a passage of St. Augustine, upon which we could not agree," said
the Gascon.

"Decidedly, this is a clever fellow," murmured Athos.

"And now you are assembled, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "permit me to
offer you my apologies."

At this word APOLOGIES, a cloud passed over the brow of Athos, a haughty
smile curled the lip of Porthos, and a negative sign was the reply of
Aramis.

"You do not understand me, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, throwing up his
head, the sharp and bold lines of which were at the moment gilded by a
bright ray of the sun. "I asked to be excused in case I should not be
able to discharge my debt to all three; for Monsieur Athos has the right
to kill me first, which must much diminish the face-value of your bill,
Monsieur Porthos, and render yours almost null, Monsieur Aramis. And
now, gentlemen, I repeat, excuse me, but on that account only, and--on
guard!"

At these words, with the most gallant air possible, d'Artagnan drew his
sword.

The blood had mounted to the head of d'Artagnan, and at that moment he
would have drawn his sword against all the Musketeers in the kingdom as
willingly as he now did against Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

It was a quarter past midday. The sun was in its zenith, and the spot
chosen for the scene of the duel was exposed to its full ardor.

"It is very hot," said Athos, drawing his sword in its turn, "and yet I
cannot take off my doublet; for I just now felt my wound begin to bleed
again, and I should not like to annoy Monsieur with the sight of blood
which he has not drawn from me himself."

"That is true, Monsieur," replied d'Artagnan, "and whether drawn by
myself or another, I assure you I shall always view with regret the
blood of so brave a gentleman. I will therefore fight in my doublet,
like yourself."

"Come, come, enough of such compliments!" cried Porthos. "Remember, we
are waiting for our turns."

"Speak for yourself when you are inclined to utter such incongruities,"
interrupted Aramis. "For my part, I think what they say is very well
said, and quite worthy of two gentlemen."

"When you please, monsieur," said Athos, putting himself on guard.

"I waited your orders," said d'Artagnan, crossing swords.

But scarcely had the two rapiers clashed, when a company of the Guards
of his Eminence, commanded by M. de Jussac, turned the corner of the
convent.

"The cardinal's Guards!" cried Aramis and Porthos at the same time.
"Sheathe your swords, gentlemen, sheathe your swords!"

But it was too late. The two combatants had been seen in a position
which left no doubt of their intentions.

"Halloo!" cried Jussac, advancing toward them and making a sign to his
men to do so likewise, "halloo, Musketeers? Fighting here, are you? And
the edicts? What is become of them?"

"You are very generous, gentlemen of the Guards," said Athos, full of
rancor, for Jussac was one of the aggressors of the preceding day. "If
we were to see you fighting, I can assure you that we would make no
effort to prevent you. Leave us alone, then, and you will enjoy a little
amusement without cost to yourselves."

"Gentlemen," said Jussac, "it is with great regret that I pronounce the
thing impossible. Duty before everything. Sheathe, then, if you please,
and follow us."

"Monsieur," said Aramis, parodying Jussac, "it would afford us great
pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended upon ourselves;
but unfortunately the thing is impossible--Monsieur de Treville has
forbidden it. Pass on your way, then; it is the best thing to do."

This raillery exasperated Jussac. "We will charge upon you, then," said
he, "if you disobey."

"There are five of them," said Athos, half aloud, "and we are but three;
we shall be beaten again, and must die on the spot, for, on my part, I
declare I will never appear again before the captain as a conquered
man."

Athos, Porthos, and Aramis instantly drew near one another, while Jussac
drew up his soldiers.

This short interval was sufficient to determine d'Artagnan on the part
he was to take. It was one of those events which decide the life of a
man; it was a choice between the king and the cardinal--the choice made,
it must be persisted in. To fight, that was to disobey the law, that was
to risk his head, that was to make at one blow an enemy of a minister
more powerful than the king himself. All this the young man perceived,
and yet, to his praise we speak it, he did not hesitate a second.
Turning towards Athos and his friends, "Gentlemen," said he, "allow me
to correct your words, if you please. You said you were but three, but
it appears to me we are four."

"But you are not one of us," said Porthos.

"That's true," replied d'Artagnan; "I have not the uniform, but I have
the spirit. My heart is that of a Musketeer; I feel it, monsieur, and
that impels me on."

"Withdraw, young man," cried Jussac, who doubtless, by his gestures and
the expression of his countenance, had guessed d'Artagnan's design. "You
may retire; we consent to that. Save your skin; begone quickly."

D'Artagnan did not budge.

"Decidedly, you are a brave fellow," said Athos, pressing the young
man's hand.

"Come, come, choose your part," replied Jussac.

"Well," said Porthos to Aramis, "we must do something."

"Monsieur is full of generosity," said Athos.

But all three reflected upon the youth of d'Artagnan, and dreaded his
inexperience.

"We should only be three, one of whom is wounded, with the addition of a
boy," resumed Athos; "and yet it will not be the less said we were four
men."

"Yes, but to yield!" said Porthos.

"That IS difficult," replied Athos.

D'Artagnan comprehended their irresolution.

"Try me, gentlemen," said he, "and I swear to you by my honor that I
will not go hence if we are conquered."

"What is your name, my brave fellow?" said Athos.

"d'Artagnan, monsieur."

"Well, then, Athos, Porthos, Aramis, and d'Artagnan, forward!" cried
Athos.

"Come, gentlemen, have you decided?" cried Jussac for the third time.

"It is done, gentlemen," said Athos.

"And what is your choice?" asked Jussac.

"We are about to have the honor of charging you," replied Aramis,
lifting his hat with one hand and drawing his sword with the other.

"Ah! You resist, do you?" cried Jussac.

"S'blood; does that astonish you?"

And the nine combatants rushed upon each other with a fury which however
did not exclude a certain degree of method.

Athos fixed upon a certain Cahusac, a favorite of the cardinal's.
Porthos had Bicarat, and Aramis found himself opposed to two
adversaries. As to d'Artagnan, he sprang toward Jussac himself.

The heart of the young Gascon beat as if it would burst through his
side--not from fear, God be thanked, he had not the shade of it, but
with emulation; he fought like a furious tiger, turning ten times round
his adversary, and changing his ground and his guard twenty times.
Jussac was, as was then said, a fine blade, and had had much practice;
nevertheless it required all his skill to defend himself against an
adversary who, active and energetic, departed every instant from
received rules, attacking him on all sides at once, and yet parrying
like a man who had the greatest respect for his own epidermis.

This contest at length exhausted Jussac's patience. Furious at being
held in check by one whom he had considered a boy, he became warm and
began to make mistakes. D'Artagnan, who though wanting in practice had a
sound theory, redoubled his agility. Jussac, anxious to put an end to
this, springing forward, aimed a terrible thrust at his adversary, but
the latter parried it; and while Jussac was recovering himself, glided
like a serpent beneath his blade, and passed his sword through his body.
Jussac fell like a dead mass.

D'Artagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the field of
battle.

Aramis had killed one of his adversaries, but the other pressed him
warmly. Nevertheless, Aramis was in a good situation, and able to defend
himself.

Bicarat and Porthos had just made counterhits. Porthos had received a
thrust through his arm, and Bicarat one through his thigh. But neither
of these two wounds was serious, and they only fought more earnestly.

Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, became evidently paler, but did not give
way a foot. He only changed his sword hand, and fought with his left
hand.

According to the laws of dueling at that period, d'Artagnan was at
liberty to assist whom he pleased. While he was endeavoring to find out
which of his companions stood in greatest need, he caught a glance from
Athos. The glance was of sublime eloquence. Athos would have died rather
than appeal for help; but he could look, and with that look ask
assistance. D'Artagnan interpreted it; with a terrible bound he sprang
to the side of Cahusac, crying, "To me, Monsieur Guardsman; I will slay
you!"

Cahusac turned. It was time; for Athos, whose great courage alone
supported him, sank upon his knee.

"S'blood!" cried he to d'Artagnan, "do not kill him, young man, I beg of
you. I have an old affair to settle with him when I am cured and sound
again. Disarm him only--make sure of his sword. That's it! Very well
done!"

The exclamation was drawn from Athos by seeing the sword of Cahusac fly
twenty paces from him. D'Artagnan and Cahusac sprang forward at the same
instant, the one to recover, the other to obtain, the sword; but
d'Artagnan, being the more active, reached it first and placed his foot
upon it.

Cahusac immediately ran to the Guardsman whom Aramis had killed, seized
his rapier, and returned toward d'Artagnan; but on his way he met Athos,
who during his relief which d'Artagnan had procured him had recovered
his breath, and who, for fear that d'Artagnan would kill his enemy,
wished to resume the fight.

D'Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not to leave him
alone; and in a few minutes Cahusac fell, with a sword thrust through
his throat.

At the same instant Aramis placed his sword point on the breast of his
fallen enemy, and forced him to ask for mercy.

There only then remained Porthos and Bicarat. Porthos made a thousand
flourishes, asking Bicarat what o'clock it could be, and offering him
his compliments upon his brother's having just obtained a company in the
regiment of Navarre; but, jest as he might, he gained nothing. Bicarat
was one of those iron men who never fell dead.

Nevertheless, it was necessary to finish. The watch might come up and
take all the combatants, wounded or not, royalists or cardinalists.
Athos, Aramis, and d'Artagnan surrounded Bicarat, and required him to
surrender. Though alone against all and with a wound in his thigh,
Bicarat wished to hold out; but Jussac, who had risen upon his elbow,
cried out to him to yield. Bicarat was a Gascon, as d'Artagnan was; he
turned a deaf ear, and contented himself with laughing, and between two
parries finding time to point to a spot of earth with his sword, "Here,"
cried he, parodying a verse of the Bible, "here will Bicarat die; for I
only am left, and they seek my life."

"But there are four against you; leave off, I command you."

"Ah, if you command me, that's another thing," said Bicarat. "As you are
my commander, it is my duty to obey." And springing backward, he broke
his sword across his knee to avoid the necessity of surrendering it,
threw the pieces over the convent wall, and crossed him arms, whistling
a cardinalist air.

Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy. The Musketeers saluted
Bicarat with their swords, and returned them to their sheaths.
D'Artagnan did the same. Then, assisted by Bicarat, the only one left
standing, they bore Jussac, Cahusac, and one of Aramis's adversaries who
was only wounded, under the porch of the convent. The fourth, as we have
said, was dead. They then rang the bell, and carrying away four swords
out of five, they took their road, intoxicated with joy, toward the
hotel of M. de Treville.

They walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the street and
taking in every Musketeer they met, so that in the end it became a
triumphal march. The heart of d'Artagnan swam in delirium; he marched
between Athos and Porthos, pressing them tenderly.

"If I am not yet a Musketeer," said he to his new friends, as he passed
through the gateway of M. de Treville's hotel, "at least I have entered
upon my apprenticeship, haven't I?"





6 HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII


This affair made a great noise. M. de Treville scolded his Musketeers in
public, and congratulated them in private; but as no time was to be lost
in gaining the king, M. de Treville hastened to report himself at the
Louvre. It was already too late. The king was closeted with the
cardinal, and M. de Treville was informed that the king was busy and
could not receive him at that moment. In the evening M. de Treville
attended the king's gaming table. The king was winning; and as he was
very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor. Perceiving M. de Treville
at a distance--

"Come here, Monsieur Captain," said he, "come here, that I may growl at
you. Do you know that his Eminence has been making fresh complaints
against your Musketeers, and that with so much emotion, that this
evening his Eminence is indisposed? Ah, these Musketeers of yours are
very devils--fellows to be hanged."

"No, sire," replied Treville, who saw at the first glance how things
would go, "on the contrary, they are good creatures, as meek as lambs,
and have but one desire, I'll be their warranty. And that is that their
swords may never leave their scabbards but in your majesty's service.
But what are they to do? The Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal are forever
seeking quarrels with them, and for the honor of the corps even, the
poor young men are obliged to defend themselves."

"Listen to Monsieur de Treville," said the king; "listen to him! Would
not one say he was speaking of a religious community? In truth, my dear
Captain, I have a great mind to take away your commission and give it to
Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom I promised an abbey. But don't fancy
that I am going to take you on your bare word. I am called Louis the
Just, Monsieur de Treville, and by and by, by and by we will see."

"Ah, sire; it is because I confide in that justice that I shall wait
patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your Majesty."

"Wait, then, monsieur, wait," said the king; "I will not detain you
long."

In fact, fortune changed; and as the king began to lose what he had won,
he was not sorry to find an excuse for playing Charlemagne--if we may
use a gaming phrase of whose origin we confess our ignorance. The king
therefore arose a minute after, and putting the money which lay before
him into his pocket, the major part of which arose from his winnings,
"La Vieuville," said he, "take my place; I must speak to Monsieur de
Treville on an affair of importance. Ah, I had eighty louis before me;
put down the same sum, so that they who have lost may have nothing to
complain of. Justice before everything."

Then turning toward M. de Treville and walking with him toward the
embrasure of a window, "Well, monsieur," continued he, "you say it is
his Eminence's Guards who have sought a quarrel with your Musketeers?"

"Yes, sire, as they always do."

"And how did the thing happen? Let us see, for you know, my dear
Captain, a judge must hear both sides."

"Good Lord! In the most simple and natural manner possible. Three of my
best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, and whose devotedness
you have more than once appreciated, and who have, I dare affirm to the
king, his service much at heart--three of my best soldiers, I say,
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had made a party of pleasure with a young
fellow from Gascony, whom I had introduced to them the same morning. The
party was to take place at St. Germain, I believe, and they had
appointed to meet at the Carmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by de
Jussac, Cahusac, Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not
go there in such a numerous company without some ill intention against
the edicts."

"Ah, ah! You incline me to think so," said the king. "There is no doubt
they went thither to fight themselves."

"I do not accuse them, sire; but I leave your Majesty to judge what five
armed men could possibly be going to do in such a deserted place as the
neighborhood of the Convent des Carmes."

"Yes, you are right, Treville, you are right!"

"Then, upon seeing my Musketeers they changed their minds, and forgot
their private hatred for partisan hatred; for your Majesty cannot be
ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the king and nobody but the
king, are the natural enemies of the Guardsmen, who belong to the
cardinal."

"Yes, Treville, yes," said the king, in a melancholy tone; "and it is
very sad, believe me, to see thus two parties in France, two heads to
royalty. But all this will come to an end, Treville, will come to an
end. You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought a quarrel with the
Musketeers?"

"I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but I will
not swear to it, sire. You know how difficult it is to discover the
truth; and unless a man be endowed with that admirable instinct which
causes Louis XIII to be named the Just--"

"You are right, Treville; but they were not alone, your Musketeers. They
had a youth with them?"

"Yes, sire, and one wounded man; so that three of the king's
Musketeers--one of whom was wounded--and a youth not only maintained
their ground against five of the most terrible of the cardinal's
Guardsmen, but absolutely brought four of them to earth."

"Why, this is a victory!" cried the king, all radiant, "a complete
victory!"

"Yes, sire; as complete as that of the Bridge of Ce."

"Four men, one of them wounded, and a youth, say you?"

"One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself so admirably
on this occasion that I will take the liberty of recommending him to
your Majesty."

"How does he call himself?"

"d'Artagnan, sire; he is the son of one of my oldest friends--the son of
a man who served under the king your father, of glorious memory, in the
civil war."

"And you say this young man behaved himself well? Tell me how,
Treville--you know how I delight in accounts of war and fighting."

And Louis XIII twisted his mustache proudly, placing his hand upon his
hip.

"Sire," resumed Treville, "as I told you, Monsieur d'Artagnan is little
more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being a Musketeer, he
was dressed as a citizen. The Guards of the cardinal, perceiving his
youth and that he did not belong to the corps, invited him to retire
before they attacked."

"So you may plainly see, Treville," interrupted the king, "it was they
who attacked?"

"That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head. They
called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he was a Musketeer
at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and that therefore he would
remain with Messieurs the Musketeers."

"Brave young man!" murmured the king.

"Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him so firm a
champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible sword thrust which
has made the cardinal so angry."

"He who wounded Jussac!" cried the king, "he, a boy! Treville, that's
impossible!"

"It is as I have the honor to relate it to your Majesty."

"Jussac, one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom?"

"Well, sire, for once he found his master."

"I will see this young man, Treville--I will see him; and if anything
can be done--well, we will make it our business."

"When will your Majesty deign to receive him?"

"Tomorrow, at midday, Treville."

"Shall I bring him alone?"

"No, bring me all four together. I wish to thank them all at once.
Devoted men are so rare, Treville, by the back staircase. It is useless
to let the cardinal know."

"Yes, sire."

"You understand, Treville--an edict is still an edict, it is forbidden
to fight, after all."

"But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinary conditions of a
duel. It is a brawl; and the proof is that there were five of the
cardinal's Guardsmen against my three Musketeers and Monsieur
d'Artagnan."

"That is true," said the king; "but never mind, Treville, come still by
the back staircase."

Treville smiled; but as it was indeed something to have prevailed upon
this child to rebel against his master, he saluted the king
respectfully, and with this agreement, took leave of him.

That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor accorded
them. As they had long been acquainted with the king, they were not much
excited; but d'Artagnan, with his Gascon imagination, saw in it his
future fortune, and passed the night in golden dreams. By eight o'clock
in the morning he was at the apartment of Athos.

D'Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out. As the hour
to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made a party with
Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in a tennis court situated
near the stables of the Luxembourg. Athos invited d'Artagnan to follow
them; and although ignorant of the game, which he had never played, he
accepted, not knowing what to do with his time from nine o'clock in the
morning, as it then scarcely was, till twelve.

The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together. Athos,
who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with d'Artagnan to
the opposite side and challenged them; but at the first effort he made,
although he played with his left hand, he found that his wound was yet
too recent to allow of such exertion. D'Artagnan remained, therefore,
alone; and as he declared he was too ignorant of the game to play it
regularly they only continued giving balls to one another without
counting. But one of these balls, launched by Porthos' herculean hand,
passed so close to d'Artagnan's face that he thought that if, instead of
passing near, it had hit him, his audience would have been probably
lost, as it would have been impossible for him to present himself before
the king. Now, as upon this audience, in his Gascon imagination,
depended his future life, he saluted Aramis and Porthos politely,
declaring that he would not resume the game until he should be prepared
to play with them on more equal terms, and went and took his place near
the cord and in the gallery.

Unfortunately for d'Artagnan, among the spectators was one of his
Eminence's Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of his
companions, which had happened only the day before, had promised himself
to seize the first opportunity of avenging it. He believed this
opportunity was now come and addressed his neighbor: "It is not
astonishing that that young man should be afraid of a ball, for he is
doubtless a Musketeer apprentice."

D'Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixed his
eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made this insolent
speech.

"PARDIEU," resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, "look at me as
long as you like, my little gentleman! I have said what I have said."

"And as since that which you have said is too clear to require any
explanation," replied d'Artagnan, in a low voice, "I beg you to follow
me."

"And when?" asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air.

"At once, if you please."

"And you know who I am, without doubt?"

"I? I am completely ignorant; nor does it much disquiet me."

"You're in the wrong there; for if you knew my name, perhaps you would
not be so pressing."

"What is your name?"

"Bernajoux, at your service."

"Well, then, Monsieur Bernajoux," said d'Artagnan, tranquilly, "I will
wait for you at the door."

"Go, monsieur, I will follow you."

"Do not hurry yourself, monsieur, lest it be observed that we go out
together. You must be aware that for our undertaking, company would be
in the way."

"That's true," said the Guardsman, astonished that his name had not
produced more effect upon the young man.

Indeed, the name of Bernajoux was known to all the world, d'Artagnan
alone excepted, perhaps; for it was one of those which figured most
frequently in the daily brawls which all the edicts of the cardinal
could not repress.

Porthos and Aramis were so engaged with their game, and Athos was
watching them with so much attention, that they did not even perceive
their young companion go out, who, as he had told the Guardsman of his
Eminence, stopped outside the door. An instant after, the Guardsman
descended in his turn. As d'Artagnan had no time to lose, on account of
the audience of the king, which was fixed for midday, he cast his eyes
around, and seeing that the street was empty, said to his adversary, "My
faith! It is fortunate for you, although your name is Bernajoux, to have
only to deal with an apprentice Musketeer. Never mind; be content, I
will do my best. On guard!"

"But," said he whom d'Artagnan thus provoked, "it appears to me that
this place is badly chosen, and that we should be better behind the
Abbey St. Germain or in the Pre-aux-Clercs."

"What you say is full of sense," replied d'Artagnan; "but unfortunately
I have very little time to spare, having an appointment at twelve
precisely. On guard, then, monsieur, on guard!"

Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to him twice. In
an instant his sword glittered in his hand, and he sprang upon his
adversary, whom, thanks to his great youthfulness, he hoped to
intimidate.

But d'Artagnan had on the preceding day served his apprenticeship. Fresh
sharpened by his victory, full of hopes of future favor, he was resolved
not to recoil a step. So the two swords were crossed close to the hilts,
and as d'Artagnan stood firm, it was his adversary who made the
retreating step; but d'Artagnan seized the moment at which, in this
movement, the sword of Bernajoux deviated from the line. He freed his
weapon, made a lunge, and touched his adversary on the shoulder.
D'Artagnan immediately made a step backward and raised his sword; but
Bernajoux cried out that it was nothing, and rushing blindly upon him,
absolutely spitted himself upon d'Artagnan's sword. As, however, he did
not fall, as he did not declare himself conquered, but only broke away
toward the hotel of M. de la Tremouille, in whose service he had a
relative, d'Artagnan was ignorant of the seriousness of the last wound
his adversary had received, and pressing him warmly, without doubt would
soon have completed his work with a third blow, when the noise which
arose from the street being heard in the tennis court, two of the
friends of the Guardsman, who had seen him go out after exchanging some
words with d'Artagnan, rushed, sword in hand, from the court, and fell
upon the conqueror. But Athos, Porthos, and Aramis quickly appeared in
their turn, and the moment the two Guardsmen attacked their young
companion, drove them back. Bernajoux now fell, and as the Guardsmen
were only two against four, they began to cry, "To the rescue! The Hotel
de la Tremouille!" At these cries, all who were in the hotel rushed out
and fell upon the four companions, who on their side cried aloud, "To
the rescue, Musketeers!"

This cry was generally heeded; for the Musketeers were known to be
enemies of the cardinal, and were beloved on account of the hatred they
bore to his Eminence. Thus the soldiers of other companies than those
which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramis had called him, often took
part with the king's Musketeers in these quarrels. Of three Guardsmen of
the company of M. Dessessart who were passing, two came to the
assistance of the four companions, while the other ran toward the hotel
of M. de Treville, crying, "To the rescue, Musketeers! To the rescue!"
As usual, this hotel was full of soldiers of this company, who hastened
to the succor of their comrades. The MELEE became general, but strength
was on the side of the Musketeers. The cardinal's Guards and M. de la
Tremouille's people retreated into the hotel, the doors of which they
closed just in time to prevent their enemies from entering with them. As
to the wounded man, he had been taken in at once, and, as we have said,
in a very bad state.

Excitement was at its height among the Musketeers and their allies, and
they even began to deliberate whether they should not set fire to the
hotel to punish the insolence of M. de la Tremouille's domestics in
daring to make a SORTIE upon the king's Musketeers. The proposition had
been made, and received with enthusiasm, when fortunately eleven o'clock
struck. D'Artagnan and his companions remembered their audience, and as
they would very much have regretted that such an opportunity should be
lost, they succeeded in calming their friends, who contented themselves
with hurling some paving stones against the gates; but the gates were
too strong. They soon tired of the sport. Besides, those who must be
considered the leaders of the enterprise had quit the group and were
making their way toward the hotel of M. de Treville, who was waiting for
them, already informed of this fresh disturbance.

"Quick to the Louvre," said he, "to the Louvre without losing an
instant, and let us endeavor to see the king before he is prejudiced by
the cardinal. We will describe the thing to him as a consequence of the
affair of yesterday, and the two will pass off together."

M de Treville, accompanied by the four young fellows, directed his
course toward the Louvre; but to the great astonishment of the captain
of the Musketeers, he was informed that the king had gone stag hunting
in the forest of St. Germain. M. de Treville required this intelligence
to be repeated to him twice, and each time his companions saw his brow
become darker.

"Had his Majesty," asked he, "any intention of holding this hunting
party yesterday?"

"No, your Excellency," replied the valet de chambre, "the Master of the
Hounds came this morning to inform him that he had marked down a stag.
At first the king answered that he would not go; but he could not resist
his love of sport, and set out after dinner."

"And the king has seen the cardinal?" asked M. de Treville.

"In all probability he has," replied the valet, "for I saw the horses
harnessed to his Eminence's carriage this morning, and when I asked
where he was going, they told me, 'To St. Germain.'"

"He is beforehand with us," said M. de Treville. "Gentlemen, I will see
the king this evening; but as to you, I do not advise you to risk doing
so."

This advice was too reasonable, and moreover came from a man who knew
the king too well, to allow the four young men to dispute it. M. de
Treville recommended everyone to return home and wait for news.

On entering his hotel, M. de Treville thought it best to be first in
making the complaint. He sent one of his servants to M. de la Tremouille
with a letter in which he begged of him to eject the cardinal's
Guardsmen from his house, and to reprimand his people for their audacity
in making SORTIE against the king's Musketeers. But M. de la
Tremouille--already prejudiced by his esquire, whose relative, as we
already know, Bernajoux was--replied that it was neither for M. de
Treville nor the Musketeers to complain, but, on the contrary, for him,
whose people the Musketeers had assaulted and whose hotel they had
endeavored to burn. Now, as the debate between these two nobles might
last a long time, each becoming, naturally, more firm in his own
opinion, M. de Treville thought of an expedient which might terminate it
quietly. This was to go himself to M. de la Tremouille.

He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hotel, and caused himself to
be announced.

The two nobles saluted each other politely, for if no friendship existed
between them, there was at least esteem. Both were men of courage and
honor; and as M. de la Tremouille--a Protestant, and seeing the king
seldom--was of no party, he did not, in general, carry any bias into his
social relations. This time, however, his address, although polite, was
cooler than usual.

"Monsieur," said M. de Treville, "we fancy that we have each cause to
complain of the other, and I am come to endeavor to clear up this
affair."

"I have no objection," replied M. de la Tremouille, "but I warn you that
I am well informed, and all the fault is with your Musketeers."

"You are too just and reasonable a man, monsieur!" said Treville, "not
to accept the proposal I am about to make to you."

"Make it, monsieur, I listen."

"How is Monsieur Bernajoux, your esquire's relative?"

"Why, monsieur, very ill indeed! In addition to the sword thrust in his
arm, which is not dangerous, he has received another right through his
lungs, of which the doctor says bad things."

"But has the wounded man retained his senses?"

"Perfectly."

"Does he talk?"

"With difficulty, but he can speak."

"Well, monsieur, let us go to him. Let us adjure him, in the name of the
God before whom he must perhaps appear, to speak the truth. I will take
him for judge in his own cause, monsieur, and will believe what he will
say."

M de la Tremouille reflected for an instant; then as it was difficult to
suggest a more reasonable proposal, he agreed to it.

Both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay. The latter,
on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him, endeavored to
raise himself up in his bed; but he was too weak, and exhausted by the
effort, he fell back again almost senseless.

M de la Tremouille approached him, and made him inhale some salts, which
recalled him to life. Then M. de Treville, unwilling that it should be
thought that he had influenced the wounded man, requested M. de la
Tremouille to interrogate him himself.

That happened which M. de Treville had foreseen. Placed between life and
death, as Bernajoux was, he had no idea for a moment of concealing the
truth; and he described to the two nobles the affair exactly as it had
passed.

This was all that M. de Treville wanted. He wished Bernajoux a speedy
convalescence, took leave of M. de la Tremouille, returned to his hotel,
and immediately sent word to the four friends that he awaited their
company at dinner.

M de Treville entertained good company, wholly anticardinalist, though.
It may easily be understood, therefore, that the conversation during the
whole of dinner turned upon the two checks that his Eminence's Guardsmen
had received. Now, as d'Artagnan had been the hero of these two fights,
it was upon him that all the felicitations fell, which Athos, Porthos,
and Aramis abandoned to him, not only as good comrades, but as men who
had so often had their turn that they could very well afford him his.

Toward six o'clock M. de Treville announced that it was time to go to
the Louvre; but as the hour of audience granted by his Majesty was past,
instead of claiming the ENTREE by the back stairs, he placed himself
with the four young men in the antechamber. The king had not yet
returned from hunting. Our young men had been waiting about half an
hour, amid a crowd of courtiers, when all the doors were thrown open,
and his Majesty was announced.

At his announcement d'Artagnan felt himself tremble to the very marrow
of his bones. The coming instant would in all probability decide the
rest of his life. His eyes therefore were fixed in a sort of agony upon
the door through which the king must enter.

Louis XIII appeared, walking fast. He was in hunting costume covered
with dust, wearing large boots, and holding a whip in his hand. At the
first glance, d'Artagnan judged that the mind of the king was stormy.

This disposition, visible as it was in his Majesty, did not prevent the
courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway. In royal
antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angry eye than not to
be seen at all. The three Musketeers therefore did not hesitate to make
a step forward. D'Artagnan on the contrary remained concealed behind
them; but although the king knew Athos, Porthos, and Aramis personally,
he passed before them without speaking or looking--indeed, as if he had
never seen them before. As for M. de Treville, when the eyes of the king
fell upon him, he sustained the look with so much firmness that it was
the king who dropped his eyes; after which his Majesty, grumbling,
entered his apartment.

"Matters go but badly," said Athos, smiling; "and we shall not be made
Chevaliers of the Order this time."

"Wait here ten minutes," said M. de Treville; "and if at the expiration
of ten minutes you do not see me come out, return to my hotel, for it
will be useless for you to wait for me longer."

The four young men waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour, twenty
minutes; and seeing that M. de Treville did not return, went away very
uneasy as to what was going to happen.

M de Treville entered the king's cabinet boldly, and found his Majesty
in a very ill humor, seated on an armchair, beating his boot with the
handle of his whip. This, however, did not prevent his asking, with the
greatest coolness, after his Majesty's health.

"Bad, monsieur, bad!" replied the king; "I am bored."

This was, in fact, the worst complaint of Louis XIII, who would
sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say, "Monsieur
So-and-so, let us weary ourselves together."

"How! Your Majesty is bored? Have you not enjoyed the pleasures of the
chase today?"

"A fine pleasure, indeed, monsieur! Upon my soul, everything
degenerates; and I don't know whether it is the game which leaves no
scent, or the dogs that have no noses. We started a stag of ten
branches. We chased him for six hours, and when he was near being
taken--when St.-Simon was already putting his horn to his mouth to sound
the mort--crack, all the pack takes the wrong scent and sets off after a
two-year-older. I shall be obliged to give up hunting, as I have given
up hawking. Ah, I am an unfortunate king, Monsieur de Treville! I had
but one gerfalcon, and he died day before yesterday."

"Indeed, sire, I wholly comprehend your disappointment. The misfortune
is great; but I think you have still a good number of falcons, sparrow
hawks, and tiercels."

"And not a man to instruct them. Falconers are declining. I know no one
but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of venery. After me it
will all be over, and people will hunt with gins, snares, and traps. If
I had but the time to train pupils! But there is the cardinal always at
hand, who does not leave me a moment's repose; who talks to me about
Spain, who talks to me about Austria, who talks to me about England! Ah!
A PROPOS of the cardinal, Monsieur de Treville, I am vexed with you!"

This was the chance at which M. de Treville waited for the king. He knew
the king of old, and he knew that all these complaints were but a
preface--a sort of excitation to encourage himself--and that he had now
come to his point at last.

"And in what have I been so unfortunate as to displease your Majesty?"
asked M. de Treville, feigning the most profound astonishment.

"Is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?" continued the king,
without directly replying to de Treville's question. "Is it for this I
name you captain of my Musketeers, that they should assassinate a man,
disturb a whole quarter, and endeavor to set fire to Paris, without your
saying a word? But yet," continued the king, "undoubtedly my haste
accuses you wrongfully; without doubt the rioters are in prison, and you
come to tell me justice is done."

"Sire," replied M. de Treville, calmly, "on the contrary, I come to
demand it of you."

"And against whom?" cried the king.

"Against calumniators," said M. de Treville.

"Ah! This is something new," replied the king. "Will you tell me that
your three damned Musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, and your
youngster from Bearn, have not fallen, like so many furies, upon poor
Bernajoux, and have not maltreated him in such a fashion that probably
by this time he is dead? Will you tell me that they did not lay siege to
the hotel of the Duc de la Tremouille, and that they did not endeavor to
burn it?--which would not, perhaps, have been a great misfortune in time
of war, seeing that it is nothing but a nest of Huguenots, but which is,
in time of peace, a frightful example. Tell me, now, can you deny all
this?"

"And who told you this fine story, sire?" asked Treville, quietly.

"Who has told me this fine story, monsieur? Who should it be but he who
watches while I sleep, who labors while I amuse myself, who conducts
everything at home and abroad--in France as in Europe?"

"Your Majesty probably refers to God," said M. de Treville; "for I know
no one except God who can be so far above your Majesty."

"No, monsieur; I speak of the prop of the state, of my only servant, of
my only friend--of the cardinal."

"His Eminence is not his holiness, sire."

"What do you mean by that, monsieur?"

"That it is only the Pope who is infallible, and that this infallibility
does not extend to cardinals."

"You mean to say that he deceives me; you mean to say that he betrays
me? You accuse him, then? Come, speak; avow freely that you accuse him!"

"No, sire, but I say that he deceives himself. I say that he is
ill-informed. I say that he has hastily accused your Majesty's
Musketeers, toward whom he is unjust, and that he has not obtained his
information from good sources."

"The accusation comes from Monsieur de la Tremouille, from the duke
himself. What do you say to that?"

"I might answer, sire, that he is too deeply interested in the question
to be a very impartial witness; but so far from that, sire, I know the
duke to be a royal gentleman, and I refer the matter to him--but upon
one condition, sire."

"What?"

"It is that your Majesty will make him come here, will interrogate him
yourself, TETE-A-TETE, without witnesses, and that I shall see your
Majesty as soon as you have seen the duke."

"What, then! You will bind yourself," cried the king, "by what Monsieur
de la Tremouille shall say?"

"Yes, sire."

"You will accept his judgment?"

"Undoubtedly."

"And you will submit to the reparation he may require?"

"Certainly."

"La Chesnaye," said the king. "La Chesnaye!"

Louis XIII's confidential valet, who never left the door, entered in
reply to the call.

"La Chesnaye," said the king, "let someone go instantly and find
Monsieur de la Tremouille; I wish to speak with him this evening."

"Your Majesty gives me your word that you will not see anyone between
Monsieur de la Tremouille and myself?"

"Nobody, by the faith of a gentleman."

"Tomorrow, then, sire?"

"Tomorrow, monsieur."

"At what o'clock, please your Majesty?"

"At any hour you will."

"But in coming too early I should be afraid of awakening your Majesty."

"Awaken me! Do you think I ever sleep, then? I sleep no longer,
monsieur. I sometimes dream, that's all. Come, then, as early as you
like--at seven o'clock; but beware, if you and your Musketeers are
guilty."

"If my Musketeers are guilty, sire, the guilty shall be placed in your
Majesty's hands, who will dispose of them at your good pleasure. Does
your Majesty require anything further? Speak, I am ready to obey."

"No, monsieur, no; I am not called Louis the Just without reason.
Tomorrow, then, monsieur--tomorrow."

"Till then, God preserve your Majesty!"

However ill the king might sleep, M. de Treville slept still worse. He
had ordered his three Musketeers and their companion to be with him at
half past six in the morning. He took them with him, without encouraging
them or promising them anything, and without concealing from them that
their luck, and even his own, depended upon the cast of the dice.

Arrived at the foot of the back stairs, he desired them to wait. If the
king was still irritated against them, they would depart without being
seen; if the king consented to see them, they would only have to be
called.

On arriving at the king's private antechamber, M. de Treville found La
Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been able to find M. de la
Tremouille on the preceding evening at his hotel, that he returned too
late to present himself at the Louvre, that he had only that moment
arrived and that he was at that very hour with the king.

This circumstance pleased M. de Treville much, as he thus became certain
that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between M. de la
Tremouille's testimony and himself.

In fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of the
king's closet opened, and M. de Treville saw M. de la Tremouille come
out. The duke came straight up to him, and said: "Monsieur de Treville,
his Majesty has just sent for me in order to inquire respecting the
circumstances which took place yesterday at my hotel. I have told him
the truth; that is to say, that the fault lay with my people, and that I
was ready to offer you my excuses. Since I have the good fortune to meet
you, I beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of your
friends."

"Monsieur the Duke," said M. de Treville, "I was so confident of your
loyalty that I required no other defender before his Majesty than
yourself. I find that I have not been mistaken, and I thank you that
there is still one man in France of whom may be said, without
disappointment, what I have said of you."

"That's well said," cried the king, who had heard all these compliments
through the open door; "only tell him, Treville, since he wishes to be
considered your friend, that I also wish to be one of his, but he
neglects me; that it is nearly three years since I have seen him, and
that I never do see him unless I send for him. Tell him all this for me,
for these are things which a king cannot say for himself."

"Thanks, sire, thanks," said the duke; "but your Majesty may be assured
that it is not those--I do not speak of Monsieur de Treville--whom your
Majesty sees at all hours of the day that are most devoted to you."

"Ah! You have heard what I said? So much the better, Duke, so much the
better," said the king, advancing toward the door. "Ah! It is you,
Treville. Where are your Musketeers? I told you the day before yesterday
to bring them with you; why have you not done so?"

"They are below, sire, and with your permission La Chesnaye will bid
them come up."

"Yes, yes, let them come up immediately. It is nearly eight o'clock, and
at nine I expect a visit. Go, Monsieur Duke, and return often. Come in,
Treville."

The Duke saluted and retired. At the moment he opened the door, the
three Musketeers and d'Artagnan, conducted by La Chesnaye, appeared at
the top of the staircase.

"Come in, my braves," said the king, "come in; I am going to scold you."

The Musketeers advanced, bowing, d'Artagnan following closely behind
them.

"What the devil!" continued the king. "Seven of his Eminence's Guards
placed HORS DE COMBAT by you four in two days! That's too many,
gentlemen, too many! If you go on so, his Eminence will be forced to
renew his company in three weeks, and I to put the edicts in force in
all their rigor. One now and then I don't say much about; but seven in
two days, I repeat, it is too many, it is far too many!"

"Therefore, sire, your Majesty sees that they are come, quite contrite
and repentant, to offer you their excuses."

"Quite contrite and repentant! Hem!" said the king. "I place no
confidence in their hypocritical faces. In particular, there is one
yonder of a Gascon look. Come hither, monsieur."

D'Artagnan, who understood that it was to him this compliment was
addressed, approached, assuming a most deprecating air.

"Why, you told me he was a young man? This is a boy, Treville, a mere
boy! Do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed that severe thrust
at Jussac?"

"And those two equally fine thrusts at Bernajoux."

"Truly!"

"Without reckoning," said Athos, "that if he had not rescued me from the
hands of Cahusac, I should not now have the honor of making my very
humble reverence to your Majesty."

"Why he is a very devil, this Bearnais! VENTRE-SAINT-GRIS, Monsieur de
Treville, as the king my father would have said. But at this sort of
work, many doublets must be slashed and many swords broken. Now, Gascons
are always poor, are they not?"

"Sire, I can assert that they have hitherto discovered no gold mines in
their mountains; though the Lord owes them this miracle in recompense
for the manner in which they supported the pretensions of the king your
father."

"Which is to say that the Gascons made a king of me, myself, seeing that
I am my father's son, is it not, Treville? Well, happily, I don't say
nay to it. La Chesnaye, go and see if by rummaging all my pockets you
can find forty pistoles; and if you can find them, bring them to me. And
now let us see, young man, with your hand upon your conscience, how did
all this come to pass?"

D'Artagnan related the adventure of the preceding day in all its
details; how, not having been able to sleep for the joy he felt in the
expectation of seeing his Majesty, he had gone to his three friends
three hours before the hour of audience; how they had gone together to
the tennis court, and how, upon the fear he had manifested lest he
receive a ball in the face, he had been jeered at by Bernajoux, who had
nearly paid for his jeer with his life, and M. de la Tremouille, who had
nothing to do with the matter, with the loss of his hotel.

"This is all very well," murmured the king, "yes, this is just the
account the duke gave me of the affair. Poor cardinal! Seven men in two
days, and those of his very best! But that's quite enough, gentlemen;
please to understand, that's enough. You have taken your revenge for the
Rue Ferou, and even exceeded it; you ought to be satisfied."

"If your Majesty is so," said Treville, "we are."

"Oh, yes; I am," added the king, taking a handful of gold from La
Chesnaye, and putting it into the hand of d'Artagnan. "Here," said he,
"is a proof of my satisfaction."

At this epoch, the ideas of pride which are in fashion in our days did
not prevail. A gentleman received, from hand to hand, money from the
king, and was not the least in the world humiliated. D'Artagnan put his
forty pistoles into his pocket without any scruple--on the contrary,
thanking his Majesty greatly.

"There," said the king, looking at a clock, "there, now, as it is half
past eight, you may retire; for as I told you, I expect someone at nine.
Thanks for your devotedness, gentlemen. I may continue to rely upon it,
may I not?"

"Oh, sire!" cried the four companions, with one voice, "we would allow
ourselves to be cut to pieces in your Majesty's service."

"Well, well, but keep whole; that will be better, and you will be more
useful to me. Treville," added the king, in a low voice, as the others
were retiring, "as you have no room in the Musketeers, and as we have
besides decided that a novitiate is necessary before entering that
corps, place this young man in the company of the Guards of Monsieur
Dessessart, your brother-in-law. Ah, PARDIEU, Treville! I enjoy
beforehand the face the cardinal will make. He will be furious; but I
don't care. I am doing what is right."

The king waved his hand to Treville, who left him and rejoined the
Musketeers, whom he found sharing the forty pistoles with d'Artagnan.

The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, so furious
that during eight days he absented himself from the king's gaming table.
This did not prevent the king from being as complacent to him as
possible whenever he met him, or from asking in the kindest tone, "Well,
Monsieur Cardinal, how fares it with that poor Jussac and that poor
Bernajoux of yours?"





