
THE LAST.


The surprise and delight which the sight of "Under the Cedars" caused in
Elm Cottage I cannot describe. However many thousands of books are
written year by year, however many thousands are launched on the stream
to win popular favour, there is always a special charm and interest in
the first book written by one we love. It raises the person for the time
to an important place in the family; and though the poor little book may
soon be engulfed in this stream of which I speak, and lost to sight, or
beaten down by the lash of reviewers, or, worse still, left to die the
natural death of utter indifference, the author's position amongst her
own immediate friends is not altered by it.

"Under the Cedars" was fresh and bright, full of imagination and that
subtle power which touches the commonplace with interest. It had many
faults--faults of youthful exuberance of fancy--faults of construction;
but it deserved the praise of the local newspapers, which said it was
perfectly simple and pure in its style, and the descriptions of
child-life and nature alike true and unaffected. Then "Under the Cedars"
had the advantage of being well revised and corrected by an able hand.
It was well printed and well illustrated, and Hans and Carl danced about
with excited delight as they recognized their own portraits in two
knickerbockered boys of their own age.

Ada laughed at this. "All little boys look alike," she said. "You don't
suppose the man who did the pictures knew anything about you or Salome."

But Ada was none the less delighted to take back a copy to Eva Monroe on
the day when twelve presentation copies arrived from London. And Dr.
Wilton was pleased to show one to his wife.

"That child has done something to be proud of though she is so
unpretending."

All the cousins admired and applauded, and Digby was triumphant.

"Did I not always tell you that Salome was awfully clever? Not one of us
could ever come up to her."

Even Aunt Anna was pleased when a lady, of whom she thought a great
deal, said, "I have bought a charming story for children, called 'Under
the Cedars.' Have you seen it?"

It was something to take it from her writing-table and to say, "It is
written by a niece of mine, a very clever girl of seventeen. So young,
and so full of talent."

Thus did dear little Salome win praise, and in her simple heart this was
all as nothing to the joy of feeling that she had helped to lift the
burden of care from those she loved.

Raymond sailed with Philip Percival, and was full of spirit and pleasure
at the change. It was grief to his mother to lose him, but when she saw
how happy he was in the prospect, she was comforted.

Raymond was improved and daily improving, but naturally selfish people
do not suddenly become unselfish, and the whole complexion of a life is
not changed with one sudden impulse. But he had really awakened to some
sense of responsibility, and the continually good influence of Philip
Percival kept up the impression of the past which might have otherwise
died out.

When the parting was over, and the letters from Barbadoes came
regularly, Mrs. Wilton began to feel the relief of knowing that Raymond
was out of temptation and happy in the change of scene and people.

A bright prospect opened out to Philip Percival. He settled the affairs
on the sugar-plantation with great skill, and returned in the spring
with an account of what he had done so satisfactory to the partners in
the large concern, that he had a permanent appointment with a large
salary, and Raymond was to remain with him for another year.

"Then I shall come back," Philip said to Salome, "and ask you a
question."

They were walking together from Roxburgh one beautiful May evening.
Salome had been to spend the day with his mother, his last day in
England, at his special request.

"The question has been on my lips many times," he said, "since the
night--so long ago now--when I picked up this, which a careless person
dropped in the road." He took out of his pocket a large case which held
his letters, and drew from it a handkerchief. "Look," he said, "whose
property is this?"

"My handkerchief! I remember I dropped it that afternoon, and how
Stevens scolded me and said I should lose my head next."

"Well," Philip said, "I lost my heart then, and kept the handkerchief as
a compensation. Do you understand?"

"Yes," she said.

"And if I asked the question now, could you answer it, Salome?"

"I think I could," she replied.

"I have loved you ever since that evening when you looked up at me, your
face so dimly seen in the twilight," he went on; "the little brave
sister coming out to meet a stranger to save her brother from disgrace
and her mother pain. Every month, nay, every day I have lived since
then, I have loved you more. Can you love me, and, when I come back next
time, be my wife?"

"Yes," was the simple answer. Then, as if to strengthen it, she
repeated, "Oh yes; let us go home and tell mother."

How happy they were as they walked to Elm Cottage together, and how
bright and joyous were all the inhabitants of the little home that
evening. The next morning, Puck, after an extra washing, had a piece of
red ribbon tied round his neck, which was a long established custom on
birthdays, and Salome said, as she tied it on between smiles and tears,
for she had just parted with Philip for a whole year,--

"Ah, Puck, this is a grand day, not a birthday, but such a happy day to
me; and, Puck, my new story is to be called 'Under the Quarry!'"

"A very poor prospect for Salome," Aunt Anna said; "still, it is
something that the Percivals are a good old family."

"A greater comfort still," rejoined Dr. Wilton, "is that Percival is one
of the best and noblest of men. May our daughters be equally fortunate."

So we leave Salome standing on the threshold of her great happiness.
Patience has had her perfect work in the days of her girlhood. Will she
need it no more in the womanhood which is dawning upon her with the
soft, sweet radiance of a faithful heart on which she may rest?

Yes; Patience, that fair and beautiful angel, with its calm, sedate
presence, will be needed for Salome as for us all through every stage of
the journey. When the gates of love open for us, and we enter into what
seems an Eden, we know that there are thorns amongst the flowers, rough
places to tread, sharp angles to meet. Salome will take Patience with
her, nor leave her gentle guidance till she comes to the Paradise of
God. For _there_ are no crosses to bear and no imperfect work to mourn,
no sin to be hid in secret places, no sorrow, nor any more pain. The
former things have passed away, and Patience, having had her perfect
work, is exchanged for the rest of those who have fought the good fight,
and bear the palms of victory in their hands through Him who has
redeemed us to God by His death, and given to His faithful ones the life
everlasting.


     "Safe home! safe home in port!
      Rent cordage, shattered deck,
      Torn sails, provisions short,
      And only not a wreck:
    But oh! the joy upon the shore
    To tell our voyage-perils o'er!"

   "The prize! the prize secure!
      The athlete nearly fell;
    Bore all he could endure,
      And bore not always well:
    But he may smile at troubles gone
    Who sets the victor's garland on."


          THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *


          Kingston's (W. H. G.) Books for Boys.

          Crown 8vo Volumes, gilt edges, price 5s. each.
          Cloth extra, uniform binding, 3s. 6d. each.

=In the Wilds of Africa.= With upwards of Seventy Illustrations.

     An interesting account of the adventures of a shipwrecked
     party who are landed on the west coast of Africa, and make
     their way to the south through many dangers.

=In the Eastern Seas=; or, The Regions of the Bird of Paradise. A Tale
for Boys. With One Hundred and Eleven Illustrations.

     A tale of voyage and adventure among the islands of the Malay
     Archipelago.

=Old Jack.= A Sea Tale. With Sixty-six Illustrations.

     An old sailor's account of his own adventures, during times
     of peace and of war, in many parts of the world.

=The South Sea Whaler.= A Story of the Loss of the _Champion_, and the
Adventures of her Crew. With upwards of Thirty Illustrations.

     A tale of mutiny and shipwreck in the South Seas.

=A Voyage Round the World.= With Forty-two Illustrations.

     A young sailor's account of his own adventures by sea and
     land.

=The Young Rajah.= A Story of Indian Life and Adventure. With upwards of
Forty Full-page Illustrations.

     A story of the Indian Mutiny; the hero a young Indian prince,
     who had received an English education and become a Christian.

=On the Banks of the Amazon=; or, A Boy's Journal of his Adventures in
the Tropical Wilds of South America. Profusely illustrated.

=In the Wilds of Florida.= With Thirty-seven Illustrations.

     A tale of warfare and hunting.

=My First Voyage to Southern Seas.= Fifty-two Illustrations.

     A young sailor's story, describing Cape Colony, Ceylon, Aden,
     etc.

=Saved from the Sea=; or, The Loss of the _Viper_, and the Adventures of
her Crew in the Great Sahara. With Thirty Full-page Illustrations.

     A young sailor's account of his adventures, along with three
     shipwrecked comrades.

=Twice Lost.= With Thirty-six Illustrations.

     A young sailor's story of shipwreck, and of perilous
     adventures in the wilds of Australia.

=The Wanderers=; or, Adventures in the Wilds of Trinidad and up the
Orinoco. With Thirty Full-page Illustrations.

=The Young Llanero.= A Story of War and Wild Life in Venezuela. With
Forty-four Illustrations.

     A thrilling and fascinating narrative of adventures in South
     America during the struggle for independence between the
     state of Colombia and the Spaniards.

       *       *       *       *       *

          The Boys' Own Library.

          Post 8vo, cloth extra. Price 2s. each.

THREE BOOKS BY M. DOUGLAS.

=Across Greenland's Ice-Fields.= The Adventures of Nansen and Peary on
the Great Ice-Cap.

=Breaking the Record.= The Story of Three Arctic Expeditions.

=The White North.= With Nordenskiold, De Long, and Nansen. With
Illustrations.


=After Years.= A Story of Trials and Triumphs. By J. W. BRADLEY. With
Illustrations.

=Culm Rock=; or, Ready Work for Willing Hands. A Book for Boys. By J. W.
BRADLEY. With Illustrations.

=Among the Turks.= By VERNEY LOVETT CAMERON, C.B., D.C.L., Commander
Royal Navy. With Illustrations.

=Archie Digby=; or, An Eton Boy's Holidays. By G. E. WYATT.

=As We Sweep Through the Deep.= A Story of the Stirring Times of Old. By
GORDON STABLES, M.D., R.N. With Illustrations.

=At the Black Rocks.= A Story for Boys. By the Rev. EDWARD A. RAND.

=The Battle of the Rafts.= And Other Stories of Boyhood in Norway. By H.
H. BOYESEN.

=A Fortune from the Sky.= By SKELTON KUPPORD. Illustrated by ROBERT
HOPE.

=Great Explorers.= An Account of Exploration and Travel in many Lands.
With Illustrations.

=Gunpowder Treason and Plot=, and other Stories for Boys. By HAROLD
AVERY, FRED. WHISHAW, and R. B. TOWNSHEND. With Illustrations.

=Lost in the Wilds of Canada.= By ELEANOR STREDDER.

=The Lost Squire of Inglewood=; or, Adventures in the Caves of Robin
Hood. A Boy's Story of Adventure. By Dr. JACKSON. Illustrated by WALTER
G. GRIEVE.

=The Romance of the South Pole.= Antarctic Voyages and Explorations. By
G. BARNETT SMITH. With Illustrations.

=Soldiers of the Queen=; or, Jack Fenleigh's Luck. A Story of the Dash
to Khartoum. By HAROLD AVERY.

=Vandrad the Viking=; or, The Feud and the Spell. A Tale of the
Norsemen. By J. STORER CLOUSTON. With Illustrations by HUBERT PATON.

=The Willoughby Boys.= By EMILY C. HARTLEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Tales of Adventure.

          Crown 8vo. Price 5s. each.

THREE BOOKS BY ELIZA F. POLLARD.

=A Daughter of France.= A Tale of the Early Settlement of Acadia. With
Six Illustrations by W. RAINEY, R.I.

     An interesting story of the adventures of Charles de la Tour
     and his companions in Acadia.

=The Last of the Cliffords.= Illustrated by WAL PAGET.

=My Lady Marcia.= A Story of the French Revolution. With Five
Illustrations by WAL PAGET.


=In Savage Africa=; or, The Adventures of Frank Baldwin from the Gold
Coast to Zanzibar. By VERNEY LOVETT CAMERON, C.B., D.C.L., Commander
Royal Navy; Author of "Jack Hooper," etc. With Thirty-two Illustrations.

     "From the deft and prolific pen of Commander Lovett
     Cameron.... In the course of a stirring narrative, of the
     kind in which boys most delight, he succeeds in conveying
     much real knowledge about Africa, its features, and its
     peoples."--_Scotsman._

=Jack Ralston.= A Tale of Life in the Far North-East of Canada. By
HAMPDEN BURNHAM, M.A., Author of "Canadians in the Imperial Service."
With Coloured Illustrations by WALTER GRIEVE.

=Every Inch a Sailor.= By GORDON STABLES, M.D., R.N., Author of "As We
Sweep through the Deep," etc. Illustrated.

     "Between the reader, ourselves, and the binnacle, there isn't
     a living writer--unless it be Clark Russell, and he appeals
     more to the adult--who can hold a candle, or shall we say a
     starboard light, to Gordon Stables as a narrator of sea
     stories for boys. This one is worthy of the high traditions
     of the author."--_Literary World._

=Held to Ransom.= A Story of Spanish Brigands. By F. B. FORESTER, Author
of "A Settler's Story," etc. Illustrated by ARCHIBALD WEBB.

=Jack Hooper.= His Adventures at Sea and in South Africa. By VERNEY
LOVETT CAMERON, C.B., D.C.L. With Twenty-three Full-page Illustrations.

=Kilgorman.= A Story of Ireland in 1798. By TALBOT BAINES REED, Author
of "The Fifth Form at St. Dominic's," etc. Illustrated by JOHN
WILLIAMSON. With Portrait, and an "In Memoriam" Sketch of the Author by
JOHN SIME.

=With Pack and Rifle in the Far South-West.= Adventures in New Mexico,
Arizona, and Central America. By ACHILLES DAUNT, Author of "Frank
Redcliffe," "The Three Trappers," etc. With Thirty Illustrations.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Favourite Reward Books.

          Post 8vo, cloth extra. Price 1s. each.

=The Giants, and How to Fight Them.= By the Rev. RICHARD NEWTON, D.D.
With numerous Illustrations.

     Dr. Newton possesses in the highest degree the art of
     interesting and instructing the young.

=Glory.= By G. M. S. With Illustrations.

     A touching story of a poor dolls' dressmaker and the
     sacrifice she made.

=Godliness with Contentment is Great Gain.=

=Grandma's Miracles=; or, Stories Told at Six o'Clock in the Evening. By
PANSY.

=A Hedge Fence.= By PANSY. With Illustrations.

     A story of a boy whose purposes are good, but whose
     impetuosity plunges him into all kinds of mischief, as the
     boy himself expresses it, "before he knows it."

=Side by Side.= And Other Tales. By PANSY. With Illustrations.

=Striving to Help=; or, The Browning Boys. By PANSY.

=Granny.= A Village Story. By the Author of "Great Englishmen."

=Jem's Wife.= A Story of Life in London. By the Author of "Granny," etc.

=The Harrington Girls=; or, Faith and Patience. By SOPHY WINTHROP.

=Hope On=; or, The House that Jack Built. With Twenty-five
Illustrations.

=Ilka: The Captive Maiden.= And Other Stories. By S. G., Author of
"Dickie Winton," etc.

=It's His Way.= And Other Stories. By the Author of "Copsley Annals,"
etc.

=Jack's Visit.= By ELLEN VELVIN. With numerous Illustrations.

     A brightly-told story of Jack and his three cousins.

=Johnnie Venture.= A Story of an Exciting Journey. By G. E. WYATT.

=King Matthias and the Beggar Boy.= Adapted from the Hungarian of Baron
Nicholas Josika. By SELINA GAYE.

=Kitty's Knitting Needles--The One Moss Rose.= By the Rev. P. B. POWER.

=A Lad of Devon.= A Story for Boys. By Mrs. HENRY CLARKE, M.A.

     The story of a search for missing diamonds that had
     disappeared from a house in Devonshire, and the adventures
     that befell a boy in trying to discover them.

=Laura's Impulses=; or, Principle a Safer Guide than Feeling.

=Leaving the Manse.= A Disruption Tale. By KEZIA. Illustrated. Long
24mo.

     "A pretty story of the Scottish Disruption of 1843."--_The
     Christian._

=A Little Candle.= And Other Stories. By LETITIA M'CLINTOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Hayens's (Herbert) Books for Boys.

Price 6s. each.

=For the Colours.= A Historical Sketch of the British Army. With
Coloured Frontispiece and Thirty-two Illustrations by ARCHIBALD WEBB and
other well-known artists. Crown 8vo, bevelled boards, cloth extra, gilt
top.

=Ye Mariners of England.= A Boys' Book of the Navy. Profusely
illustrated. Crown 8vo, bevelled boards, cloth extra, gilt top.


_Tales of Adventure._

    Crown 8vo, bevelled boards, cloth extra, gilt top, price 5s. each.

=At the Point of the Sword.= A New Story for Boys. Illustrated by R.
PAYTON REID, A.R.S.A.

=A Captain of Irregulars.= A Stirring Tale of War and Adventure in
Chili. With Six Illustrations by SIDNEY PAGET.

=Clevely Sahib.= A Tale of the Khyber Pass. With Eight Illustrations by
J. WILLIAMSON.

=An Emperor's Doom=; or, The Patriots of Mexico. With Eight
Illustrations by A. J. B. SALMON.

=A Fighter in Green.= A Tale of Algeria. With Nine Illustrations by R.
TALBOT KELLY, R.B.A.

=In the Grip of the Spaniard.= With Nine Illustrations by WAL PAGET.

=Red, White, and Green.= Illustrated by ARCH. WEBB.

=Under the Lone Star.= With Eight Illustrations by W. S. STACEY.

=A Vanished Nation.= A Tale of Fighting in Paraguay. With Six
Illustrations by W. B. WOLLEN, R.I.


Price 3s. 6d. each.

=The British Legion.= A Tale of the Carlist War. With Six Illustrations
by W. H. MARGETSON.

=Scouting for Buller.= A Story of the South African War. With Coloured
Illustrations.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Self-Effort Series.

          Price 3s. 6d. each.

=Men Who Win=; or, Making Things Happen. By W. M. THAYER, Author of
"From Log Cabin to White House," etc.

=Women Who Win=; or, Making Things Happen. By W. M. THAYER, Author of
"From Log Cabin to White House," etc.

=The Achievements of Youth.= By the Rev. ROBERT STEEL, D.D., Ph.D.,
Author of "Lives Made Sublime," etc.

=Lives Made Sublime by Faith and Works.= By Rev. ROBERT STEEL, D.D.,
Ph.D., Author of "Doing Good," etc.

=Self-Effort=; or, The True Method of Attaining Success in Life. By
JOSEPH JOHNSON, Author of "Living in Earnest," etc.

=The Secret of Achievement.= A Book designed to teach that the highest
Achievement is that which results in noble Manhood and Womanhood; that
there is something greater than wealth, grander than fame; that
character is the only success. By ORISON SWETT MARDEN, Author of
"Architects of Fate," etc. Illustrated with Portraits of eminent
Persons.

=Noble Women of Our Time.= By JOSEPH JOHNSON, Author of "Living in
Earnest," etc. With Accounts of the Work of Misses De Broen, Whately,
Carpenter, F. R. Havergal, Sister Dora, etc.

=Architects of Fate=; or, Steps to Success and Power. By ORISON SWETT
MARDEN, Author of "Pushing to the Front; or, Success under
Difficulties." With Eight Illustrations.

=Earnest Men=: Their Life and Work. By the late Rev. W. K. TWEEDIE, D.D.

=Famous Artists.= Michael Angelo--Leonardo da
Vinci--Raphael--Titian--Murillo--Rubens--Rembrandt. By SARAH K. BOLTON.

=Fritz of Prussia.= Germany's Second Emperor. By LUCY TAYLOR, Author of
"Going on Pilgrimage," etc.

=Heroes of the Desert.= The Story of the Lives of Moffat and
Livingstone. By the Author of "Mary Powell." New and Enlarged Edition,
with numerous Illustrations and Two Portraits.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Books for the School Library.

_The World at the Fireside._

    Small 4to, gilt edges.
    Illustrated. Price 5s. each.

=The Children's Tour=; or, Everyday Sights in a Sunny Land. By M. A.
PAULL. With numerous Illustrations.

=The Sea and its Wonders.= By MARY and ELIZABETH KIRBY. One Hundred and
Seventy-four Illustrations.

=The World at Home.= Pictures and Scenes from Far-off Lands. By M. and
E. KIRBY. One Hundred Illustrations.

=Wonderland=; or, Curiosities of Nature and Art. By WOOD SMITH, Author
of "Oakville Manor," "Prince Rolo," etc. With numerous Illustrations.

=Rambles Among the Wild Flowers.= A Book for the Young. By M. C. COOKE,
M.A., LL.D. (UNCLE MATT). The Five Parts in One Volume. With Ten
Coloured Plates, illustrating Forty-two Wild Flowers, and 296 other
Illustrations. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Round the Hearthstone=; or, Hints for Home-Builders. By W. M. THAYER,
Author of "Men Who Win," "Women Who Win," etc. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
gilt edges.


_Works of Travel and Research._

    Crown 8vo, cloth extra, gilt top.
    Price 5s. each.

=The Bible in Spain=; or, The Journeys, Adventures, and Imprisonments of
an Englishman in an Attempt to Circulate the Scriptures in the
Peninsula. By GEORGE BORROW. With Illustrations.

=Captain Cook's Voyages Round the World.= With a Memoir by M. B. SYNGE.

=Journal of a Voyage Round the World of H.M.S. "Beagle."= By CHARLES
DARWIN, M.A., F.R.S. With Sixteen Full-page and Six Double-page
Illustrations.

=Kane's Arctic Explorations=: The Second Grinnell Expedition in Search
of Sir John Franklin. With a Chart and numerous Illustrations.

=The Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus.= By WASHINGTON IRVING.
_Author's Revised Edition._ With Illustrations.

=Voyages and Travels of Captain Basil Hall.= With Illustrations.

=Wanderings in South America, etc.= By CHARLES WATERTON. With Sixteen
Illustrations.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Classic Stories Simply Told.

          Uniform Binding. Price 3s. each.

=Chaucer's Stories Simply Told.= By MARY SEYMOUR, Author of
"Shakespeare's Stories Simply Told," etc. With Eleven Illustrations from
Designs by E. M. SCANNELL. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Shakespeare's Stories Simply Told.= TRAGEDIES AND HISTORICAL PLAYS. By
MARY SEYMOUR. With Eighty-three Illustrations by the late FRANK HOWARD,
R.A. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Shakespeare's Stories Simply Told.= COMEDIES. By MARY SEYMOUR. With
numerous Illustrations by the late FRANK HOWARD, R.A. Post 8vo, cloth
extra, gilt edges.

=The Wanderings of Aeneas and the Founding of Rome.= By CHARLES HENRY
HANSON, Author of "The Siege of Troy, and the Wanderings of Ulysses,"
etc. With Sixty-two Illustrations. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=The Siege of Troy, and the Wanderings of Ulysses.= By CHARLES HENRY
HANSON. With Ninety-seven Illustrations from Designs by FLAXMAN and
other Artists. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=Stories of the Days of King Arthur.= By CHARLES H. HANSON. With
Illustrations by GUSTAVE DORE. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.


_Uniform with Classic Stories._

=Coleridge's Ancient Mariner.= With Twenty-five Illustrations by DAVID
SCOTT, R.S.A., and Life of the Artist by the Rev. Dr. A. L. SIMPSON,
Derby. Square 16mo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=The Shipwreck.= A Poem. By WILLIAM FALCONER. Illustrated by BIRKET
FOSTER. Post 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges.

=The Courteous Knight=, and Other Tales from Spenser and Malory. By E.
EDWARDSON. _Edition de luxe_, on antique paper. Illustrated by ROBERT
HOPE.

=Shakespeare's Dramatic Works.= With Explanatory Notes, Parallel
Passages, Historical and Critical Illustrations, Contemporary Allusions,
a Copious Glossary, Biographical Sketch, and Indexes, by W. H. DAVENPORT
ADAMS. With Three Hundred and Seventy Illustrations by the late FRANK
HOWARD, R.A., and Facsimile of Shakespeare's Will. Two Volumes. Crown
8vo, cloth. Price 3s. 6d. per vol.; or 7s. per set.

       *       *       *       *       *

          UNIFORM WITH
          The "Little Hazel" Series.

          Post 8vo, cloth extra. Price 1s. 6d. each.

=Jock o' the Beach.= A Story for Boys. By MORICE GERARD.

     The hero is a nameless waif, sole survivor from the wreck of
     the ship _Martin_. His discovery of his parents and his
     meeting with them are touchingly described.

=Little Lily's Travels.= A Book for the Young. With numerous
Illustrations.

     Travels of a little girl, with her parents and brother,
     through France to Geneva.

=The Little Swedish Baron.= By the Author of "The Swedish Twins," etc.

     A story of a young Swedish noble, illustrating the blessings
     of discipline and trials.

=Master Travers.= By FLORENCE M. STORY.

     The story of a young squire whose self-will leads him into
     many troubles, and how these, and the well-timed counsels of
     his guardians, help to subdue his besetting sin.

=Mopsie.= The Story of a London Waif. By DOROTHY WALROND.

=Nono=; or, The Golden House. A Tale of Swedish Life. By Mrs. WOODS
BAKER.

=Princess Louise.= A Tale of the Stuarts. By CRONA TEMPLE.

=Rollo and Tricksy.= The Story of a Little Boy and Girl. By FLORENCE E.
BURCH.

     A tale of the doings of a little boy and girl, the latter
     part being very amusing.

=Rich and Poor.= A Tale for Boys. How one Boy Climbed Up, and another
Slipped Down. By C. M. TROWBRIDGE.

     This pithy story recognizes the discouragements and
     temptations peculiar to poverty and wealth, and seeks to show
     that a sterling Christian character is that which can alone
     make a truly noble man.

=The Secret Cave=; or, The Story of Mistress Joan's Ring. By Miss EMILIE
SEARCHFIELD.

     "Mistress Joan" is a bright little girl, aged nine years,
     daughter of Jonathan Blye, farmer in Somersetshire; and
     "Mistress Joan's Ring" is an heirloom preserved in memory of
     "The Secret Cave," and of what happened there in the year
     1685. The incidents, which are narrated in quaint,
     old-fashioned language, are very exciting; and the book is
     sure to be a great favourite, especially with girls.

"=Sheltering Arms=;" or, The Entrance of God's Word gives Light. By M.
E. CLEMENTS. Floral Design.

     An interesting Irish story. The scene is a small fishing
     hamlet on the west coast of Ireland, sheltered by two rocky
     headlands from the Atlantic storms.

=Story of the Beacon Fire=; or, Trust in God and Do the Right. By M. E.
CLEMENTS.

     "The story is well, indeed powerfully, written. It is a story
     of Cornwall, and is full of genuine dramatic interest,
     combined with an earnestness of purpose that no one can
     mistake."--_Scotsman._

       *       *       *       *       *

          Favourite Reward Books.

          Post 8vo, cloth extra. Price 1s. each.

=The Adopted Brothers=; or, Blessed are the Peacemakers. By M. E.
CLEMENTS.

=Alda's Leap.= And Other Stories. By the Hon. Mrs. GREENE.

=The Babe i' the Mill=, and =Zanina the Flower-Girl of Florence=. By the
Hon. Mrs. GREENE.

=Annals of the Poor.= Complete Edition, with Memoir of LEGH RICHMOND.

=The Babes in the Basket=; or, Daph and Her Charge. By the Author of
"Timid Lucy," etc. With Frontispiece and numerous Illustrations.

=The Basket of Flowers=; or, Piety and Truth Triumphant. Illustrated.

=The Boy Artist.= A Tale. By the Author of "Hope On." With numerous
Illustrations.

=Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress.=

=A Child of the Mews.= By M. B. SYNGE.

     The purpose of the story is to show the evils of betting--how
     it leads to cheating, lying, stealing, and all kinds of
     trickery, ending often in domestic misery and ruin.

=The Children's Voyage to the Cape.= By SARAH L. FINDLATER.

=The Cruise of the "Katherina."= A Story for Boys. By JOHN A. HIGGINSON,
Author of "A Secret of the Sea," etc. Illustrated.

     The story deals with the meeting of two friends in Australia,
     and the many strange adventures subsequently experienced by
     them when together they set out on board a small schooner in
     search of gold known to lie hidden on a certain island in the
     South Pacific.

=Daffodil.= (A Brave Little Lady.) By MAUDE M. BUTLER.

     A sequel to "Waiting and Serving."

=The Fairy Cobblers' Gold.= A Story for Boys. By ETHEL PENROSE.

=The Ferryman's Boy.= And Other Stories. By CRONA TEMPLE.

=Fireside Sketches from Swedish Life.= By Mrs. WOODS BAKER.

=The Swedish Foster-Brothers.= By Mrs. WOODS BAKER. With Illustrations.

=Truth and its Triumph=; or, The Story of the Jewish Twins. By Mrs.
WOODS BAKER. With Frontispiece.

=The Fisherman's Boy=; or, "All have not the same Gifts." With coloured
Frontispiece.

=Geordie Stuart.= A Story of Waterloo. By M. B. MANWELL.


T. NELSON AND SONS, London, Edinburgh, and New York.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Spelling and punctuation errors were corrected.

Retained: devonport, ascendency, fire-place and fireplace, ink-stand and
inkstand, practice (for medical) and practise (for repeatedly do).

Locations of illustrations have been moved to the action in text that
they illustrate. Most of these moves were slight changes, but the
illustration on p. 66 originally displayed as a frontispiece before the
title page illustration.

On caption in illustration list, original "Dr. Wilson" changed to "Dr.
Wilton."

P. 22, "any more if-- If you come upstairs"; space after em dash deleted.

P. 42, "'I should have thought,' said Dr. Wilton", original read Mr.
Wilton.

P. 100, "Edith and Maude", original read "Maud."

P. 139, "walking with them, and-- But if mother"; space after em dash
deleted.

P. 191, quotes added around "It was far better ... time."

P. 245, Poem at the end, "Safe home!", inconsistent indentation is
faithful to the original as printed.

The ten pages of ads at the end of the text each displayed "T. Nelson
and Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York." at the bottom of the page.
These have been reduced to one occurrence, at the bottom of the last ad
page.


