ACT I


(SCENE.--_A room furnished comfortably and tastefully, but not
extravagantly. At the back, a door to the right leads to the
entrance-hall, another to the left leads to Helmer's study. Between the
doors stands a piano. In the middle of the left-hand wall is a door, and
beyond it a window. Near the window are a round table, armchairs and a
small sofa. In the right-hand wall, at the farther end, another door;
and on the same side, nearer the footlights, a stove, two easy chairs
and a rocking-chair; between the stove and the door, a small table.
Engravings on the wall; a cabinet with china and other small objects; a
small book-case with well-bound books. The floors are carpeted, and a
fire burns in the stove. It is winter._

_A bell rings in the hall; shortly afterwards the door is heard to open.
Enter_ NORA, _humming a tune and in high spirits. She is in out-door
dress and carries a number of parcels; these she lays on the table to
the right. She leaves the outer door open after her, and through it is
seen a_ PORTER _who is carrying a Christmas Tree and a basket, which he
gives to the_ MAID _who has opened the door_.)

_Nora_. Hide the Christmas Tree carefully, Helen. Be sure the children
do not see it till this evening, when it is dressed. (_To the_ PORTER,
_taking out her purse_.) How much?

_Porter_. Sixpence.

_Nora_. There is a shilling. No, keep the change. (_The_ PORTER _thanks
her, and goes out_. NORA _shuts the door. She is laughing to herself, as
she takes off her hat and coat. She takes a packet of macaroons from her
pocket and eats one or two; then goes cautiously to her husband's door
and listens_.) Yes, he is in. (_Still humming, she goes to the table on
the right_.)

_Helmer_ (_calls out from his room_). Is that my little lark twittering
out there?

_Nora_ (_busy opening some of the parcels_). Yes, it is!

_Helmer_. Is it my little squirrel bustling about?

_Nora_. Yes!

_Helmer_. When did my squirrel come home?

_Nora_. Just now. (_Puts the bag of macaroons into her pocket and wipes
her mouth_.) Come in here, Torvald, and see what I have bought.

_Helmer_. Don't disturb me. (_A little later, he opens the door and
looks into the room, pen in hand_.) Bought, did you say? All these
things? Has my little spendthrift been wasting money again?

_Nora_. Yes, but, Torvald, this year we really can let ourselves go a
little. This is the first Christmas that we have not needed to
economize.

_Helmer_. Still, you know, we can't spend money recklessly.

_Nora_. Yes, Torvald, we may be a wee bit more reckless now, mayn't we?
Just a tiny wee bit! You are going to have a big salary and earn lots
and lots of money.

_Helmer_. Yes, after the New Year; but then it will be a whole quarter
before the salary is due.

_Nora_. Pooh! we can borrow till then.

_Helmer_. Nora! (_Goes up to her and takes her playfully by the ear_.)
The same little featherhead! Suppose, now, that I borrowed fifty pounds
today, and you spent it all in the Christmas week, and then on New
Year's Eve a slate fell on my head and killed me, and--

_Nora_ (_putting her hands over his mouth_). Oh! don't say such horrid
things.

_Helmer_. Still, suppose that happened,--what then?

_Nora_. If that were to happen, I don't suppose I should care whether I
owed money or not.

_Helmer_. Yes, but what about the people who had lent it?

_Nora_. They? Who would bother about them? I should not know who they
were.

_Helmer_. That is like a woman! But seriously, Nora, you know what I
think about that. No debt, no borrowing. There can be no freedom or
beauty about a home life that depends on borrowing and debt. We two have
kept bravely on the straight road so far, and we will go on the same way
for the short time longer that there need be any struggle.

_Nora_ (_moving towards the stove_). As you please, Torvald.

_Helmer_ (_following her_). Come, come, my little skylark must not droop
her wings. What is this! Is my little squirrel out of temper? (_Taking
out his purse_.) Nora, what do you think I have got here?

_Nora_ (_turning round quickly_). Money!

_Helmer_. There you are. (_Gives her some money_.) Do you think I don't
know what a lot is wanted for housekeeping at Christmas-time?

_Nora_ (_counting_). Ten shillings--a pound--two pounds! Thank you,
thank you, Torvald; that will keep me going for a long time.

_Helmer_. Indeed it must.

_Nora_. Yes, yes, it will. But come here and let me show you what I have
bought. And ah so cheap! Look, here is a new suit for Ivar, and a sword;
and a horse and a trumpet for Bob; and a doll and dolly's bedstead for
Emmy.--they are very plain, but anyway she will soon break them in
pieces. And here are dress-lengths and handkerchiefs for the maids; old
Anne ought really to have something better.

_Helmer_. And what is in this parcel?

_Nora_ (_crying out_). No, no! you mustn't see that till this evening.

_Helmer_. Very well. But now tell me, you extravagant little person,
what would you like for yourself?

_Nora_. For myself? Oh, I am sure I don't want anything.

_Helmer_. Yes, but you must. Tell me something reasonable that you would
particularly like to have.

_Nora_. No, I really can't think of anything--unless, Torvald--

_Helmer_. Well?

_Nora_ (_playing with his coat buttons, and without raising her eyes to
his_). If you really want to give me something, you might--you might--

_Helmer_. Well, out with it!

_Nora_ (_speaking quickly_). You might give me money, Torvald. Only just
as much as you can afford; and then one of these days I will buy
something with it.

_Helmer_. But, Nora--

_Nora_. Oh, do! dear Torvald; please, please do! Then I will wrap it up
in beautiful gilt paper and hang it on the Christmas Tree. Wouldn't that
be fun?

_Helmer_. What are little people called that are always wasting money?

_Nora_. Spendthrifts--I know. Let us do as you suggest, Torvald, and
then I shall have time to think what I am most in want of. That is a
very sensible plan, isn't it?

_Helmer_ (_smiling_). Indeed it is--that is to say, if you were really
to save out of the money I give you, and then really buy something for
yourself. But if you spend it all on the housekeeping and any number of
unnecessary things, then I merely have to pay up again.

_Nora_. Oh but, Torvald--

_Helmer_. You can't deny it, my dear, little Nora. (_Puts his arm round
her waist_.) It's a sweet little spendthrift, but she uses up a deal of
money. One would hardly believe how expensive such little persons are!

_Nora_. It's a shame to say that. I do really save all I can.

_Helmer_ (_laughing_). That's very true,--all you can. But you can't
save anything!

_Nora_ (_smiling quietly and happily_). You haven't any idea how many
expenses we skylarks and squirrels have, Torvald.

_Helmer_. You are an odd little soul. Very like your father. You always
find some new way of wheedling money out of me, and, as soon as you have
got it, it seems to melt in your hands. You never know where it has
gone. Still, one must take you as you are. It is in the blood; for
indeed it is true that you can inherit these things, Nora.

_Nora_. Ah, I wish I had inherited many of papa's qualities.

_Helmer_. And I would not wish you to be anything but just what you are,
my sweet little skylark. But, do you know, it strikes me that you are
looking rather--what shall I say--rather uneasy today?

_Nora_. Do I?

_Helmer_. You do, really. Look straight at me.

_Nora_ (_looks at him_). Well?

_Helmer_ (_wagging his finger at her_). Hasn't Miss Sweet-Tooth been
breaking rules in town today?

_Nora_. No; what makes you think that?

_Helmer_. Hasn't she paid a visit to the confectioner's?

_Nora_. No, I assure you, Torvald--

_Helmer_. Not been nibbling sweets?

_Nora_. No, certainly not.

_Helmer_. Not even taken a bite at a macaroon or two?

_Nora_. No, Torvald, I assure you really--

_Helmer_. There, there, of course I was only joking.

_Nora_ (_going to the table on the right_). I should not think of going
against your wishes.

_Helmer_. No, I am sure of that; besides, you gave me your word--(_Going
up to her_.) Keep your little Christmas secrets to yourself, my darling.
They will all be revealed tonight when the Christmas Tree is lit, no
doubt.

_Nora_. Did you remember to invite Doctor Rank?

_Helmer_. No. But there is no need; as a matter of course he will come
to dinner with us. However, I will ask him when he comes in this
morning. I have ordered some good wine. Nora, you can't think how I am
looking forward to this evening.

_Nora_. So am I! And how the children will enjoy themselves, Torvald!

_Helmer_. It is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe
appointment, and a big enough income. It's delightful to think of, isn't
it?

_Nora_. It's wonderful!

_Helmer_. Do you remember last Christmas? For a full three weeks
beforehand you shut yourself up every evening till long after midnight,
making ornaments for the Christmas Tree and all the other fine things
that were to be a surprise to us. It was the dullest three weeks I ever
spent!

_Nora_. I didn't find it dull.

_Helmer_ (_smiling_). But there was precious little result, Nora.

_Nora_. Oh, you shouldn't tease me about that again. How could I help
the cat's going in and tearing everything to pieces?

_Helmer_. Of course you couldn't, poor little girl. You had the best of
intentions to please us all, and that's the main thing. But it is a good
thing that our hard times are over.

_Nora_. Yes, it is really wonderful.

_Helmer_. This time I needn't sit here and be dull all alone, and you
needn't ruin your dear eyes and your pretty little hands--

_Nora_ (_clapping her hands_). No, Torvald, I needn't any longer, need
I! It's wonderfully lovely to hear you say so! (_Taking his arm_.) Now I
will tell you how I have been thinking we ought to arrange things,
Torvald. As soon as Christmas is over--(_A bell rings in the hall_.)
There's the bell. (_She tidies the room a little_.) There's someone at
the door. What a nuisance!

_Helmer_. If it is a caller, remember I am not at home.

_Maid_ (_in the doorway_). A lady to see you, ma'am,--a stranger.

_Nora_. Ask her to come in.

_Maid_ (_to_ HELMER). The doctor came at the same time, sir.

_Helmer_. Did he go straight into my room?

_Maid_. Yes, sir.

(HELMER _goes into his room. The_ MAID _ushers in_ MRS. LINDE, _who is
in traveling dress, and shuts the door_.)

_Mrs Linde_ (_in a dejected and timid voice_). How do you do, Nora?

_Nora_ (_doubtfully_). How do you do--

_Mrs. Linde_. You don't recognize me, I suppose.

_Nora_ No, I don't know--yes, to be sure, I seem to--(_Suddenly_.) Yes!
Christine! Is it really you?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, it is I.

_Nora_. Christine! To think of my not recognising you! And yet how could
I--(_In a gentle voice_.) How you have altered, Christine!

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, I have indeed. In nine, ten long years--

_Nora_. Is it so long since we met? I suppose it is. The last eight
years have been a happy time for me, I can tell you. And so now you have
come into the town, and have taken this long journey in winter--that was
plucky of you.

_Mrs. Linde_. I arrived by steamer this morning.

_Nora_. To have some fun at Christmas-time, of course. How delightful!
We will have such fun together! But take off your things. You are not
cold, I hope. (_Helps her_.) Now we will sit down by the stove, and be
cosy. No, take this arm-chair; I will sit here in the rocking-chair.
(_Takes her hands_.) Now you look like your old self again; it was only
the first moment--You are a little paler, Christine, and perhaps a
little thinner.

_Mrs. Linde_. And much, much older, Nora.

_Nora_. Perhaps a little older; very, very little; certainly not much.
(_Stops suddenly and speaks seriously_.) What a thoughtless creature I
am, chattering away like this. My poor, dear Christine, do forgive me.

_Mrs. Linde_. What do you mean, Nora?

_Nora_ (_gently_). Poor Christine, you are a widow.

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes; it is three years ago now.

_Nora_. Yes, I knew; I saw it in the papers. I assure you, Christine, I
meant ever so often to write to you at the time, but I always put it off
and something always prevented me.

_Mrs. Linde_. I quite understand, dear.

_Nora_. It was very bad of me, Christine. Poor thing, how you must have
suffered. And he left you nothing?

_Mrs. Linde_. No.

_Nora_. And no children?

_Mrs. Linde_. No.

_Nora_. Nothing at all, then?

_Mrs. Linde_. Not even any sorrow or grief to live upon.

_Nora_ (_looking incredulously at her_). But, Christine, is that
possible?

_Mrs. Linde_ (_smiles sadly and strokes her hair_). It sometimes
happens, Nora.

_Nora_. So you are quite alone. How dreadfully sad that must be. I have
three lovely children. You can't see them just now, for they are out
with their nurse. But now you must tell me all about it.

_Mrs. Linde_. No, no; I want to hear about you.

_Nora_. No, you must begin. I mustn't be selfish today; today I must
only think of your affairs. But there is one thing I must tell you. Do
you know we have just had a great piece of good luck?

_Mrs. Linde_. No, what is it?

_Nora_. Just fancy, my husband has been made manager of the Bank!

_Mrs. Linde_. Your husband? What good luck!

_Nora_. Yes tremendous! A barrister's profession is such an uncertain
thing, especially if he won't undertake unsavoury cases; and naturally
Torvald has never been willing to do that, and I quite agree with him.
You may imagine how pleased we are! He is to take up his work in the
Bank at the New Year, and then he will have a big salary and lots of
commissions. For the future we can live quite differently--we can do
just as we like. I feel so relieved and so happy, Christine! It will be
splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety, won't
it?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, anyhow I think it would be delightful to have what
one needs.

_Nora_. No, not only what one needs, but heaps and heaps of money.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_smiling_). Nora, Nora, haven't you learnt sense yet? In
our schooldays you were a great spendthrift.

_Nora_ (_laughing_). Yes, that is what Torvald says now. (_Wags her
finger at her_.) But "Nora, Nora" is not so silly as you think. We have
not been in a position for me to waste money. We have both had to work.

_Mrs. Linde_. You too?

_Nora_. Yes; odds and ends, needlework, crochet-work, embroidery, and
that kind of thing. (_Dropping her voice_.) And other things as well.
You know Torvald left his office when we were married? There was no
prospect of promotion there, and he had to try and earn more than
before. But during the first year he overworked himself dreadfully. You
see, he had to make money every way he could, and he worked early and
late; but he couldn't stand it, and fell dreadfully ill, and the doctors
said it was necessary for him to go south.

_Mrs. Linde_. You spent a whole year in Italy, didn't you?

_Nora_. Yes. It was no easy matter to get away, I can tell you. It was
just after Ivar was born; but naturally we had to go. It was a
wonderfully beautiful journey, and it saved Torvald's life. But it cost
a tremendous lot of money, Christine.

_Mrs. Linde_. So I should think.

_Nora_. It cost about two hundred and fifty pounds. That's a lot, isn't
it?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, and in emergencies like that it is lucky to have the
money.

_Nora_. I ought to tell you that we had it from papa.

_Mrs. Linde_. Oh, I see. It was just about that time that he died,
wasn't it?

_Nora_. Yes; and, just think of it, I couldn't go and nurse him. I was
expecting little Ivar's birth every day and I had my poor sick Torvald
to look after. My dear, kind father--I never saw him again, Christine.
That was the saddest time I have known since our marriage.

_Mrs. Linde_. I know how fond you were of him. And then you went off to
Italy?

_Nora_. Yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our
going, so we started a month later.

_Mrs. Linde_. And your husband came back quite well?

_Nora_. As sound as a bell!

_Mrs Linde_. But--the doctor?

_Nora_. What doctor?

_Mrs Linde_. I thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here
just as I did, was the doctor?

_Nora_. Yes, that was Doctor Rank, but he doesn't come here
professionally. He is our greatest friend, and comes in at least once
every day. No, Torvald has not had an hour's illness since then, and our
children are strong and healthy and so am I. (_Jumps up and claps her
hands_.) Christine! Christine! it's good to be alive and happy!--But how
horrid of me; I am talking of nothing but my own affairs. (_Sits on a
stool near her, and rests her arms on her knees_.) You mustn't be angry
with me. Tell me, is it really true that you did not love your husband?
Why did you marry him?

_Mrs. Linde_. My mother was alive then, and was bedridden and helpless,
and I had to provide for my two younger brothers; so I did not think I
was justified in refusing his offer.

_Nora_. No, perhaps you were quite right. He was rich at that time,
then?

_Mrs. Linde_. I believe he was quite well off. But his business was a
precarious one; and, when he died, it all went to pieces and there was
nothing left.

_Nora_. And then?--

_Mrs. Linde_. Well, I had to turn my hand to anything I could
find--first a small shop, then a small school, and so on. The last three
years have seemed like one long working-day, with no rest. Now it is at
an end, Nora. My poor mother needs me no more, for she is gone; and the
boys do not need me either; they have got situations and can shift for
themselves.

_Nora_. What a relief you must feel it--

_Mrs. Linde_. No, indeed; I only feel my life unspeakably empty. No one
to live for any more. (_Gets up restlessly_.) That is why I could not
stand the life in my little backwater any longer. I hope it may be
easier here to find something which will busy me and occupy my thoughts.
If only I could have the good luck to get some regular work--office work
of some kind--

_Nora_. But, Christine, that is so frightfully tiring, and you look
tired out now. You had far better go away to some watering-place.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_walking to the window_). I have no father to give me
money for a journey, Nora.

_Nora_ (_rising_). Oh, don't be angry with me.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_going up to her_). It is you that must not be angry with
me, dear. The worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so
bitter. No one to work for, and yet obliged to be always on the look-out
for chances. One must live, and so one becomes selfish. When you told me
of the happy turn your fortunes have taken--you will hardly believe
it--I was delighted not so much on your account as on my own.

_Nora_. How do you mean?--Oh, I understand. You mean that perhaps
Torvald could get you something to do.

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, that was what I was thinking of.

_Nora_. He must, Christine. Just leave it to me; I will broach the
subject very cleverly--I will think of something that will please him
very much. It will make me so happy to be of some use to you.

_Mrs. Linde_. How kind you are, Nora, to be so anxious to help me! It is
doubly kind in you, for you know so little of the burdens and troubles
of life.

_Nora_. I--? I know so little of them?

_Mrs Linde_ (_smiling_). My dear! Small household cares and that sort of
thing!--You are a child, Nora.

_Nora_ (_tosses her head and crosses the stage_). You ought not to be so
superior.

_Mrs. Linde_. No?

_Nora_. You are just like all the others. They all think that I am
incapable of anything really serious--

_Mrs. Linde_. Come, come--

_Nora_.--that I have gone through nothing in this world of cares.

_Mrs. Linde_. But, my dear Nora, you have just told me all your
troubles.

_Nora_. Pooh!--those were trifles. (_Lowering her voice_.) I have not
told you the important thing.

_Mrs. Linde_. The important thing? What do you mean?

_Nora_. You look down upon me altogether, Christine--but you ought not
to. You are proud, aren't you, of having-worked so hard and so long for
your mother?

_Mrs. Linde_. Indeed, I don't look down on any one. But it is true that
I am both proud and glad to think that I was privileged to make the end
of my mother's life almost free from care.

_Nora_. And you are proud to think of what you have done for your
brothers.

_Mrs. Linde_. I think I have the right to be.

_Nora_. I think so, too. But now, listen to this; I too have something
to be proud and glad of.

_Mrs. Linde_. I have no doubt you have. But what do you refer to?

_Nora_. Speak low. Suppose Torvald were to hear! He mustn't on any
account--no one in the world must know, Christine, except you.

_Mrs. Linde_. But what is it?

_Nora_. Come here. (_Pulls her down on the sofa beside her_.) Now I will
show you that I too have something to be proud and glad of. It was I who
saved Torvald's life.

_Mrs. Linde_. "Saved"? How?

_Nora_. I told you about our trip to Italy. Torvald would never have
recovered if he had not gone there--

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, but your father gave you the necessary funds.

_Nora_ (_smiling_). Yes, that is what Torvald and all the others think,
but--

_Mrs. Linde_. But.--

_Nora_. Papa didn't give us a shilling. It was I who procured the money.

_Mrs. Linde_. You? All that large sum?

_Nora_. Two hundred and fifty pounds. What do you think of that?

_Mrs. Linde_. But, Nora, how could you possibly do it? Did you win a
prize in the Lottery?

_Nora_ (_contemptuously_). In the Lottery? There would have been no
credit in that.

_Mrs. Linde_. But where did you get it from, then?

_Nora_ (_humming and smiling with an air of mystery_). Hm, hu! Aha!

_Mrs. Linde_. Because you couldn't have borrowed it.

_Nora_. Couldn't I? Why not?

_Mrs. Linde_. No, a wife cannot borrow without her husband's consent.

_Nora_ (_tossing her head_). Oh, if it is a wife who has any head for
business--a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever--

_Mrs. Linde_. I don't understand it at all, Nora.

_Nora_. There is no need you should. I never said I had borrowed the
money. I may have got it some other way. (_Lies back on the sofa._)
Perhaps I got it from some other admirer. When anyone is as attractive
as I am--

_Mrs. Linde_. You are a mad creature.

_Nora_. Now, you know you're full of curiosity, Christine.

_Mrs. Linde_. Listen to me, Nora dear. Haven't you been a little bit
imprudent?

_Nora_ (_sits up straight_). Is it imprudent to save your husband's
life?

_Mrs. Linde_. It seems to me imprudent, without his knowledge, to--

_Nora_. But it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! My
goodness, can't you understand that? It was necessary he should have no
idea what a dangerous condition he was in. It was to me that the doctors
came and said that his life was in danger, and that the only thing to
save him was to live in the south. Do you suppose I didn't try, first of
all, to get what I wanted as if it were for myself? I told him how much
I should love to travel abroad like other young wives; I tried tears and
entreaties with him; I told him that he ought to remember the condition
I was in, and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me; I even
hinted that he might raise a loan. That nearly made him angry,
Christine. He said I was thoughtless, and that it was his duty as my
husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices--as I believe he
called them. Very well, I thought, you must be saved--and that was how I
came to devise a way out of the difficulty--

_Mrs. Linde_. And did your husband never get to know from your father
that the money had not come from him?

_Nora_. No, never. Papa died just at that time. I had meant to let him
into the secret and beg him never to reveal it. But he was so ill
then--alas, there never was any need to tell him.

_Mrs. Linde_. And since then have you never told your secret to your
husband?

_Nora_. Good Heavens, no! How could you think so? A man who has such
strong opinions about these things! And besides, how painful and
humiliating it would be for Torvald, with his manly independence, to
know that he owed me anything! It would upset our mutual relations
altogether; our beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now.

_Mrs. Linde_. Do you mean never to tell him about it?

_Nora_ (_meditatively, and with a half smile._) Yes--some day, perhaps,
after many years, when I am no longer as nice-looking as I am now.
Don't laugh at me! I mean, of course, when Torvald is no longer as
devoted to me as he is now; when my dancing and dressing-up and reciting
have palled on him; then it may be a good thing to have something in
reserve--(_Breaking off,_) What nonsense! That time will never come.
Now, what do you think of my great secret, Christine? Do you still think
I am of no use? I can tell you, too, that this affair has caused me a
lot of worry. It has been by no means easy for me to meet my engagements
punctually. I may tell you that there is something that is called, in
business, quarterly interest, and another thing called payment in
instalments, and it is always so dreadfully difficult to manage them. I
have had to save a little here and there, where I could, you understand.
I have not been able to put aside much from my housekeeping money, for
Torvald must have a good table. I couldn't let my children be shabbily
dressed; I have felt obliged to use up all he gave me for them, the
sweet little darlings!

_Mrs. Linde_. So it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of
life, poor Nora?

_Nora_. Of course. Besides, I was the one responsible for it. Whenever
Torvald has given me money for new dresses and such things, I have never
spent more than half of it; I have always bought the simplest and
cheapest things. Thank Heaven, any clothes look well on me, and so
Torvald has never noticed it. But it was often very hard on me,
Christine--because it is delightful to be really well dressed, isn't it?

_Mrs. Linde_. Quite so.

_Nora_. Well, then I have found other ways of earning money. Last winter
I was lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do; so I locked myself up
and sat writing every evening until quite late at night. Many a time I
was desperately tired; but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to
sit there working and earning money. It was like being a man.

_Mrs. Linde_. How much have you been able to pay off in that way?

_Nora_. I can't tell you exactly. You see, it is very difficult to keep
an account of a business matter of that kind. I only know that I have
paid every penny that I could scrape together. Many a time I was at my
wits' end. (_Smiles._) Then I used to sit here and imagine that a rich
old gentleman had fallen in love with me--

_Mrs. Linde_. What! Who was it?

_Nora_. Be quiet!--that he had died; and that when his will was opened
it contained, written in big letters, the instruction: "The lovely Mrs.
Nora Helmer is to have all I possess paid over to her at once in cash."

_Mrs. Linde_. But, my dear Nora--who could the man be?

_Nora_. Good gracious, can't you understand? There was no old gentleman
at all; it was only something that I used to sit here and imagine, when
I couldn't think of any way of procuring money. But it's all the same
now; the tiresome old person can stay where he is, as far as I am
concerned; I don't care about him or his will either, for I am free from
care now. (_Jumps up_.) My goodness, it's delightful to think of,
Christine! Free from care! To be able to be free from care, quite free
from care; to be able to play and romp with the children; to be able to
keep the house beautifully and have everything just as Torvald likes it!
And, think of it, soon the spring will come and the big blue sky!
Perhaps we shall be able to take a little trip--perhaps I shall see the
sea again! Oh, it's a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy. (_A bell
is heard in the hall_.)

_Mrs. Linde_ (_rising_). There is the bell; perhaps I had better go.

_Nora_. No, don't go; no one will come in here; it is sure to be for
Torvald.

_Servant_ (_at the hall door_). Excuse me, ma'am--there is a gentleman
to see the master, and as the doctor is with him--

_Nora_. Who is it?

_Krogstad_ (_at the door_). It is I, Mrs. Helmer. (_Mrs._ LINDE _starts,
trembles, and turns to the window_.)

_Nora_ (_takes a step towards him, and speaks in a strained low voice_).
You? What is it? What do you want to see my husband about?

_Krogstad_. Bank business--in a way. I have a small post in the Bank,
and I hear your husband is to be our chief now--

_Nora_. Then it is--

_Krogstad_. Nothing but dry business matters, Mrs. Helmers; absolutely
nothing else.

_Nora_. Be so good as to go into the study then. (_She bows
indifferently to him and shuts the door into the hall; then comes back
and makes up the fire in the stove_.)

_Mrs. Linde_. Nora--who was that man?

_Nora_. A lawyer, of the name of Krogstad.

_Mrs. Linde_. Then it really was he.

_Nora_. Do you know the man?

_Mrs. Linde_. I used to--many years ago. At one time he was a
solicitor's clerk in our town.

_Nora_. Yes, he was.

_Mrs. Linde_. He is greatly altered.

_Nora_. He made a very unhappy marriage.

_Mrs. Linde_. He is a widower now, isn't he?

_Nora_. With several children. There now, it is burning up. (_Shuts the
door of the stove and moves the rocking-chair aside_.)

_Mrs. Linde_. They say he carries on various kinds of business.

_Nora_. Really! Perhaps he does; I don't know anything about it. But
don't let us think of business; it is so tiresome.

_Doctor Rank_ (_comes out of_ HELMER'S _study. Before he shuts the door
he calls to him_). No, my dear fellow, I won't disturb you; I would
rather go in to your wife for a little while. (_Shuts the door and sees_
Mrs. LINDE.) I beg your pardon; I am afraid I am disturbing you too.

_Nora_. No, not at all. (_Introducing him_.) Doctor Rank, Mrs. Linde.

_Rank_. I have often heard Mrs. Linde's name mentioned here. I think I
passed you on the stairs when I arrived, Mrs. Linde?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, I go up very slowly; I can't manage stairs well.

_Rank_. Ah! some slight internal weakness?

_Mrs. Linde_. No, the fact is I have been overworking myself.

_Rank_. Nothing more than that? Then I suppose you have come to town to
amuse yourself with our entertainments?

_Mrs. Linde_. I have come to look for work.

_Rank_. Is that a good cure for overwork?

_Mrs. Linde_. One must live, Doctor Rank.

_Rank_. Yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.

_Nora_. Look here, Doctor Rank--you know you want to live.

_Rank_. Certainly. However wretched I may feel, I want to prolong the
agony as long as possible. All my patients are like that. And so are
those who are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case, too, is at
this very moment with Helmer--

_Mrs. Linde_ (_sadly_). Ah!

_Nora_. Whom do you mean?

_Rank_. A lawyer of the name of Krogstad, a fellow you don't know at
all. He suffers from a diseased moral character, Mrs. Helmer; but even
he began talking of its being highly important that he should live.

_Nora_. Did he? What did he want to speak to Torvald about?

_Rank_. I have no idea; I only heard that it was something about the
Bank.

_Nora_. I didn't know this--what's his name--Krogstad had anything to do
with the Bank.

_Rank_. Yes, he has some sort of appointment there. (_To_ Mrs. LINDE.) I
don't know whether you find also in your part of the world that there
are certain people who go zealously snuffing about to smell out moral
corruption, and, as soon as they have found some, put the person
concerned into some lucrative position where they can keep their eye on
him. Healthy natures are left out in the cold.

_Mrs. Linde_. Still I think the sick are those who most need taking care
of.

_Rank_ (_shrugging his shoulders_). Yes, there you are. That is the
sentiment that is turning Society into a sick-house.

(NORA, _who has been absorbed in her thoughts, breaks out into smothered
laughter and claps her hands_.)

_Rank_. Why do you laugh at that? Have you any notion what Society
really is?

_Nora_. What do I care about tiresome Society? I am laughing at
something quite different, something extremely amusing. Tell me, Doctor
Rank, are all the people who are employed in the Bank dependent on
Torvald now?

_Rank_. Is that what you find so extremely amusing?

_Nora_ (_smiling and humming_). That's my affair! (_Walking about the
room_.) It's perfectly glorious to think that we have--that Torvald has
so much power over so many people. (_Takes the packet from her pocket_.)
Doctor Rank, what do you say to a macaroon?

_Rank_. What, macaroons? I thought they were forbidden here.

_Nora_. Yes, but these are some Christine gave me.

_Mrs. Linde_. What! I?--

_Nora_. Oh, well, don't be alarmed! You couldn't know that Torvald had
forbidden them. I must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my
teeth. But, bah!--once in a way--That's so, isn't it, Doctor Rank? By
your leave! (_Puts a macaroon into his mouth.)_ You must have one too,
Christine. And I shall have one, just a little one--or at most two.
(_Walking about_.) I am tremendously happy. There is just one thing in
the world now that I should dearly love to do.

_Rank_. Well, what is that?

_Nora_. It's something I should dearly love to say, if Torvald could
hear me.

_Rank_. Well, why can't you say it?

_Nora_, No, I daren't; it's so shocking.

_Mrs. Linde_. Shocking?

_Rank_. Well, I should not advise you to say it. Still, with us you
might. What is it you would so much like to say if Torvald could hear
you?

_Nora_. I should just love to say--Well, I'm damned!

_Rank_. Are you mad?

_Mrs. Linde_. Nora, dear--!

_Rank_. Say it, here he is!

_Nora_ (_hiding the packet_). Hush! Hush! Hush! (HELMER _comes out of
his room, with his coat over his arm and his hat in his hand_.)

_Nora_. Well, Torvald dear, have you got rid of him?

_Helmer_. Yes, he has just gone.

_Nora_. Let me introduce you--this is Christine, who has come to town.

_Helmer_. Christine--? Excuse me, but I don't know--

_Nora_. Mrs. Linde, dear; Christine Linde.

_Helmer_. Of course. A school friend of my wife's, I presume?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, we have known each other since then.

_Nora_. And just think, she has taken a long journey in order to see
you.

_Helmer_. What do you mean?

_Mrs. Linde_. No, really, I--

_Nora_. Christine is tremendously clever at book-keeping, and she is
frightfully anxious to work under some clever man, so as to perfect
herself--

_Helmer_. Very sensible, Mrs. Linde.

_Nora_. And when she heard you had been appointed manager of the
Bank--the news was telegraphed, you know--she traveled here as quick as
she could, Torvald, I am sure you will be able to do something for
Christine, for my sake, won't you?

_Helmer_. Well, it is not altogether impossible. I presume you are a
widow, Mrs. Linde?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes.

_Helmer_. And have had some experience of bookkeeping?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, a fair amount.

_Helmer_. Ah! well it's very likely I may be able to find something for
you--

_Nora_ (_clapping her hands_). What did I tell you? What did I tell you?

_Helmer_. You have just come at a fortunate moment, Mrs. Linde.

_Mrs. Linde_. How am I to thank you?

_Helmer_. There is no need. (_Puts on his coat_.) But today you must
excuse me--

_Rank_. Wait a minute; I will come with you. (_Brings his fur coat from
the hall and warms it at the fire_.)

_Nora_. Don't be long away, Torvald dear.

_Helmer_. About an hour, not more.

_Nora_. Are you going too, Christine?

_Mrs. Linde_ (_putting on her cloak_). Yes, I must go and look for a
room.

_Helmer_. Oh, well then, we can walk down the street together.

_Nora_ (_helping her_). What a pity it is we are so short of space here;
I am afraid it is impossible for us--

_Mrs. Linde_. Please don't think of it! Good-bye, Nora dear, and many
thanks.

_Nora_. Good-bye for the present. Of course you will come back this
evening. And you too, Dr. Rank. What do you say? If you are well enough?
Oh, you must be! Wrap yourself up well. (_They go to the door all
talking together. Children's voices are heard on the staircase._)

_Nora_. There they are. There they are! (_She runs to open the door.
The_ NURSE _comes in with the children._) Come in! Come in! (_Stoops and
kisses them._) Oh, you sweet blessings! Look at them, Christine! Aren't
they darlings?

_Rank_. Don't let us stand here in the draught.

_Helmer_. Come along, Mrs. Linde; the place will only be bearable for a
mother now!

(RANK, HELMER, _and_ MRS. LINDE _go downstairs. The_ NURSE _comes
forward with the children;_ NORA _shuts the hall door._)

_Nora_. How fresh and well you look! Such red cheeks!--like apples and
roses. (_The children all talk at once while she speaks to them._) Have
you had great fun? That's splendid! What, you pulled both Emmy and Bob
along on the sledge?--both at once?--that _was_ good. You are a clever
boy, Ivar. Let me take her for a little, Anne. My sweet little baby
doll! (_Takes the baby from the_ MAID _and dances it up and down._) Yes,
yes, mother will dance with Bob too. What! Have you been snow-balling? I
wish I had been there too! No, no, I will take their things off, Anne;
please let me do it, it is such fun. Go in now, you look half frozen.
There is some hot coffee for you on the stove.

(_The_ NURSE _goes into the room on the left. Nora takes off the
children's things and throws them about, while they all talk to her at
once_.)

_Nora._ Really! Did a big dog run after you? But it didn't bite you? No,
dogs don't bite nice little dolly children. You mustn't look at the
parcels, Ivar. What are they? Ah, I daresay you would like to know. No,
no--it's something nasty! Come, let us have a game. What shall we play
at? Hide and Seek? Yes, we'll play Hide and Seek. Bob shall hide first.
Must I hide? Very well, I'll hide first. (_She and the children laugh
and shout, and romp in and out of the room; at last Nora hides under the
table the children rush in and look for her, but do not see her; they
hear her smothered laughter run to the table, lift up the cloth and find
her. Shouts of laughter. She crawls forward and pretends to frighten
them. Fresh laughter. Meanwhile there has been a knock at the hall door,
but none of them has noticed it. The door is half opened, and KROGSTAD
appears. He waits a little; the game goes on._)

_Krogstad_. Excuse me, Mrs. Helmer.

_Nora_ (_with a stifled cry, turns round and gets up on to her knees_).
Ah! what do you want?

_Krogstad_. Excuse me, the outer door was ajar; I suppose someone forgot
to shut it.

_Nora_ (_rising_). My husband is out, Mr. Krogstad.

_Krogstad_. I know that.

_Nora_. What do you want here, then?

_Krogstad_. A word with you.

_Nora_. With me?--(_To the children, gently_.) Go in to nurse. What? No,
the strange man won't do mother any harm. When he has gone we will have
another game. (_She takes the children into the room on the left, and
shuts the door after them._) You want to speak to me?

_Krogstad_. Yes, I do.

_Nora_. Today? It is not the first of the month yet.

_Krogstad_. No, it is Christmas Eve, and it will depend on yourself what
sort of a Christmas you will spend.

_Nora_. What do you want? Today it is absolutely impossible for me--

_Krogstad_. We won't talk about that till later on. This is something
different. I presume you can give me a moment?

_Nora_. Yes--yes, I can--although--

_Krogstad_. Good. I was in Olsen's Restaurant and saw your husband going
down the street--

_Nora_. Yes?

_Krogstad_. With a lady.

_Nora_. What then?

_Krogstad_. May I make so bold as to ask if it was a Mrs. Linde?

_Nora_. It was.

_Krogstad_. Just arrived in town?

_Nora_. Yes, today.

_Krogstad_. She is a great friend of yours, isn't she?

_Nora_: She is. But I don't see--

_Krogstad_. I knew her too, once upon a time.

_Nora_. I am aware of that.

_Krogstad_. Are you? So you know all about it; I thought as much. Then I
can ask you, without beating about the bush--is Mrs. Linde to have an
appointment in the Bank?

_Nora_. What right have you to question me, Mr. Krogstad?--You, one of
my husband's subordinates! But since you ask, you shall know. Yes, Mrs.
Linde _is_ to have an appointment. And it was I who pleaded her cause,
Mr. Krogstad, let me tell you that.

_Krogstad_. I was right in what I thought, then.

_Nora_ (_walking up and down the stage_). Sometimes one has a tiny
little bit of influence, I should hope. Because one is a woman, it does
not necessarily follow that--. When anyone is in a subordinate position,
Mr. Krogstad, they should really be careful to avoid offending anyone
who--who--

_Krogstad_. Who has influence?

_Nora_. Exactly.

_Krogstad_ (_changing his tone_). Mrs. Helmer, you will be so good as to
use your influence on my behalf.

_Nora_. What? What do you mean?

_Krogstad_. You will be so kind as to see that I am allowed to keep my
subordinate position in the Bank.

_Nora_. What do you mean by that? Who proposes to take your post away
from you?

_Krogstad_. Oh, there is no necessity to keep up the pretence of
ignorance. I can quite understand that your friend is not very anxious
to expose herself to the chance of rubbing shoulders with me; and I
quite understand, too, whom I have to thank for being turned off.

_Nora_. But I assure you--

_Krogstad_. Very likely; but, to come to the point, the time has come
when I should advise you to use your influence to prevent that.

_Nora_. But, Mr. Krogstad, I _have_ no influence.

_Krogstad_. Haven't you? I thought you said yourself just now--

_Nora_. Naturally I did not mean you to put that construction on it. I!
What should make you think I have any influence of that kind with my
husband?

_Krogstad_. Oh, I have known your husband from our student days. I don't
suppose he is any more unassailable than other husbands.

_Nora_. If you speak slightly of my husband, I shall turn you out of the
house.

_Krogstad_. You are bold, Mrs. Helmer.

_Nora_. I am not afraid of you any longer, As soon as the New Year
comes, I shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing.

_Krogstad_ (_controlling himself_). Listen to me, Mrs. Helmer. If
necessary, I am prepared to fight for my small post in the Bank as if I
were fighting for my life.

_Nora_. So it seems.

_Krogstad_. It is not only for the sake of the money; indeed, that
weighs least with me in the matter. There is another reason--well, I may
as well tell you. My position is this. I daresay you know, like
everybody else, that once, many years ago, I was guilty of an
indiscretion.

_Nora_. I think I have heard something of the kind.

_Krogstad_. The matter never came into court; but every way seemed to be
closed to me after that. So I took to the business that you know of. I
had to do something; and, honestly, don't think I've been one of the
worst. But now I must cut myself free from all that. My sons are growing
up; for their sake I must try and win back as much respect as I can in
the town. This post in the Bank was like the first step up for me--and
now your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud.

_Nora_. But you must believe me, Mr. Krogstad; it is not in my power to
help you at all.

_Krogstad_. Then it is because you haven't the will; but I have means to
compel you.

_Nora_. You don't mean that you will tell my husband that I owe you
money?

_Krogstad_. Hm!--suppose I were to tell him?

_Nora_. It would be perfectly infamous of you. (_Sobbing_.) To think of
his learning my secret, which has been my joy and pride, in such an
ugly, clumsy way--that he should learn it from you! And it would put me
in a horribly disagreeable position--

_Krogstad_. Only disagreeable?

_Nora_ (_impetuously_). Well, do it, then!--and it will be the worse for
you. My husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are, and you
certainly won't keep your post then.

_Krogstad_. I asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that
you were afraid of?

_Nora_. If my husband does get to know of it, of course he will at once
pay you what is still owing, and we shall have nothing more to do with
you.

_Krogstad_ (_coming a step nearer_). Listen to me, Mrs. Helmer. Either
you have a very bad memory or you know very little of business. I shall
be obliged to remind you of a few details.

_Nora_. What do you mean?

_Krogstad_. When your husband was ill, you came to me to borrow two
hundred and fifty pounds.

_Nora_. I didn't know any one else to go to.

_Krogstad_. I promised to get you that amount--

_Nora_. Yes, and you did so.

_Krogstad_. I promised to get you that amount, on certain conditions.
Your mind was so taken up with your husband's illness, and you were so
anxious to get the money for your journey, that you seem to have paid no
attention to the conditions of our bargain. Therefore it will not be
amiss if I remind you of them. Now, I promised to get the money on the
security of a bond which I drew up.

_Nora_. Yes, and which I signed.

_Krogstad_. Good. But below your signature there were a few lines
constituting your father a surety for the money; those lines your father
should have signed.

_Nora_. Should? He did sign them.

_Krogstad_. I had left the date blank; that is to say your father should
himself have inserted the date on which he signed the paper. Do you
remember that?

_Nora_. Yes, I think I remember--

_Krogstad_. Then I gave you the bond to send by post to your father. Is
that not so?

_Nora_. Yes.

_Krogstad_. And you naturally did so at once, because five or six days
afterwards you brought me the bond with your father's signature. And
then I gave you the money.

_Nora_. Well, haven't I been paying it off regularly?

_Krogstad_. Fairly so, yes. But--to come back to the matter in
hand--that must have been a very trying time for you, Mrs. Helmer?

_Nora_. It was, indeed.

_Krogstad_. Your father was very ill, wasn't he?

_Nora_. He was very near his end.

_Krogstad_. And died soon afterwards?

_Nora_. Yes.

_Krogstad_. Tell me, Mrs. Helmer, can you by any chance remember what
day your father died?--on what day of the month, I mean.

_Nora_. Papa died on the 29th of September.

_Krogstad_. That is correct; I have ascertained it for myself. And, as
that is so, there is a discrepancy (_taking a paper from his pocket_)
which I cannot account for.

_Nora_. What discrepancy? I don't know--

_Krogstad_. The discrepancy consists, Mrs. Helmer, in the fact that your
father signed this bond three days after his death.

_Nora_. What do you mean? I don't understand--

_Krogstad_. Your father died on the 29th of September. But, look here;
your father dated his signature the 2nd of October. It is a discrepancy,
isn't it? (NORA _is silent_.) Can you explain it to me? (NORA _is still
silent_.) It is a remarkable thing, too, that the words "2nd of
October," as well as the year, are not written in your father's
handwriting but in one that I think I know. Well, of course it can be
explained; your father may have forgotten to date his signature, and
someone else may have dated it haphazard before they knew of his death.
There is no harm in that. It all depends on the signature of the name;
and _that_ is genuine, I suppose, Mrs. Helmer? It was your father
himself who signed his name here?

_Nora_ (_after a short pause, throws her head up and looks defiantly at
him_). No, it was not. It was I that wrote papa's name.

_Krogstad_. Are you aware that is a dangerous confession?

_Nora_. In what way? You shall have your money soon.

_Krogstad_. Let me ask you a question; why did you not send the paper to
your father?

_Nora_. It was impossible; papa was so ill. If I had asked him for his
signature, I should have had to tell him what the money was to be used
for; and when he was so ill himself I couldn't tell him that my
husband's life was in danger--it was impossible.

_Krogstad_. It would have been better for you if you had given up your
trip abroad.

_Nora_. No, that was impossible. That trip was to save my husband's
life; I couldn't give that up.

_Krogstad_. But did it never occur to you that you were committing a
fraud on me?

_Nora_. I couldn't take that into account; I didn't trouble myself about
you at all. I couldn't bear you, because you put so many heartless
difficulties in my way, although you knew what a dangerous condition my
husband was in.

_Krogstad_. Mrs. Helmer, you evidently do not realise clearly what it is
that you have been guilty of. But I can assure you that my one false
step, which lost me all my reputation, was nothing more or nothing worse
than what you have done.

_Nora_. You? Do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run
a risk to save your wife's life.

_Krogstad_. The law cares nothing about motives.

_Nora_. Then it must be a very foolish law.

_Krogstad_. Foolish or not, it is the law by which you will be judged,
if I produce this paper in court.

_Nora_. I don't believe it. Is a daughter not to be allowed to spare her
dying father anxiety and care? Is a wife not to be allowed to save her
husband's life? I don't know much about law; but I am certain that there
must be laws permitting such things as that. Have you no knowledge of
such laws--you who are a lawyer? You must be a very poor lawyer, Mr.
Krogstad.

_Krogstad_. Maybe. But matters of business--such business as you and I
have had together--do you think I don't understand that? Very well. Do
as you please. But let me tell you this--if I lose my position a second
time, you shall lose yours with me. (_He bows, and goes out through the
hall_.)

_Nora_ (_appears buried in thought for a short time, then tosses her
head)_. Nonsense! Trying to frighten me like that!--I am not so silly as
he thinks. (_Begins to busy herself putting the children's things in
order_.) And yet--? No, it's impossible! I did it for love's sake.

_The Children_ (_in the doorway on the left.)_ Mother, the stranger man
has gone out through the gate.

_Nora_. Yes, dears, I know. But, don't tell anyone about the stranger
man. Do you hear? Not even papa.

_Children_. No, mother; but will you come and play again?

_Nora_. No no,--not now.

_ Children_. But, mother, you promised us.

_Nora_. Yes, but I can't now. Run away in; I have such a lot to do. Run
away in, sweet little darlings. (_She gets them into the room by degrees
and shuts the door on them; then sits down on the sofa, takes up a piece
of needlework and sews a few stitches, but soon stops_.) No! (_Throws
down the work, gets up, goes to the hall door and calls out_.) Helen,
bring the Tree in. (_Goes to the table on the left, opens a drawer, and
stops again_.) No, no! it is quite impossible!

_Maid_ (_coming in with the Tree_). Where shall I put it, ma'am?

_Nora_. Here, in the middle of the floor.

_Maid_. Shall I get you anything else?

_Nora_. No, thank you. I have all I want.

[_Exit_ MAID

_Nora_ (_begins dressing the tree_). A candle here--and flowers here--.
The horrible man! It's all nonsense--there's nothing wrong. The Tree
shall be splendid! I will do everything I can think of to please you,
Torvald!--I will sing for you, dance for you--(HELMER _comes in with
some papers under his arm_.) Oh! are you back already?

_Helmer_. Yes. Has anyone been here?

_Nora_. Here? No.

_Helmer_. That is strange. I saw Krogstad going out of the gate.

_Nora_. Did you? Oh yes, I forgot Krogstad was here for a moment.

_Helmer_. Nora, I can see from your manner that he has been here begging
you to say a good word for him.

_Nora_. Yes.

_Helmer_. And you were to appear to do it of your own accord; you were
to conceal from me the fact of his having been here; didn't he beg that
of you too?

_Nora_. Yes, Torvald, but--

_Helmer_. Nora, Nora, and you would be a party to that sort of thing? To
have any talk with a man like that, and give him any sort of promise?
And to tell me a lie into the bargain?

_Nora_. A lie--?

_Helmer_. Didn't you tell me no one had been here? (_Shakes his finger
at her_.) My little song-bird must never do that again. A song-bird must
have a clean beak to chirp with--no false notes! (_Puts his arm round
her waist._) That is so, isn't it? Yes, I am sure it is. (_Lets her
go_.) We will say no more about it. (_Sits down by the stove_.) How warm
and snug it is here! (_Turns over his papers_.)

_Nora_ (_after a short pause, during which she busies herself with the
Christmas Tree_). Torvald!

_Helmer_. Yes.

_Nora_: I am looking forward tremendously to the fancy dress ball at the
Stensborgs' the day after tomorrow.

_Helmer_. And I am tremendously curious to see what you are going to
surprise me with.

_Nora_. It was very silly of me to want to do that.

_Helmer_. What do you mean?

_Nora_. I can't hit upon anything that will do; everything I think of
seems so silly and insignificant.

_Helmer_. Does my little Nora acknowledge that at last?

_Nora_ (_standing behind his chair with her arms on the back of it_).
Are you very busy, Torvald?

_Helmer_. Well--

_Nora_. What are all those papers?

_Helmer_. Bank business.

_Nora_. Already?

_Helmer_. I have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake
the necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work;
and I must make use of the Christmas week for that, so as to have
everything in order for the new year.

_Nora_. Then that was why this poor Krogstad--

_Helmer_. Hm!

_Nora_ (_leans against the back of his chair and strokes his hair_). If
you hadn't been so busy I should have asked you a tremendously big
favour, Torvald.

_Helmer_. What is that? Tell me.

_Nora_. There is no one has such good taste as you. And I do so want to
look nice at the fancy-dress ball. Torvald, couldn't you take me in hand
and decide what I shall go as, and what sort of a dress I shall wear?

_Helmer_. Aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to get someone to
come to her rescue?

_Nora_. Yes, Torvald, I can't get along a bit without your help.

_Helmer_ Very well, I will think it over, we shall manage to hit upon
something.

_Nora_. That _is_ nice of you. (_Goes to the Christmas Tree. A short
pause.)_ How pretty the red flowers look--. But, tell me, was it really
something very bad that this Krogstad was guilty of?

_Helmer_. He forged someone's name. Have you any idea what that means?

_Nora_. Isn't it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?

_Helmer_. Yes; or, as in so many cases, by imprudence. I am not so
heartless as to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step
of that kind.

_Nora_. No you wouldn't, would you, Torvald?

_Helmer_. Many a man has been able to retrieve his character, if he has
openly confessed his fault and taken his punishment.

_Nora_. Punishment--?

_Helmer_. But Krogstad did nothing of that sort; he got himself out of
it by a cunning trick, and that is why he has gone under altogether.

_Nora_. But do you think it would--?

_Helmer_. Just think how a guilty man like that has to lie and play the
hypocrite with everyone, how he has to wear a mask in the presence of
those near and dear to him, even before his own wife and children. And
about the children--that is the most terrible part of it all, Nora.

_Nora_. How?

_Helmer_. Because such an atmosphere of lies infects and poisons the
whole life of a home. Each breath the children take in such a house is
full of the germs of evil.

_Nora_ (_coming nearer him_). Are you sure of that?

_Helmer_. My dear, I have often seen it in the course of my life as a
lawyer. Almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a
deceitful mother.

_Nora_. Why do you only say--mother?

_Helmer_. It seems most commonly to be the mother's influence, though
naturally a bad father's would have the same result. Every lawyer is
familiar with the fact. This Krogstad, now, has been persistently
poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation; that is why I
say he has lost all moral character. (_Holds out his hands to her.)_
That is why my sweet little Nora must promise me not to plead his cause.
Give me your hand on it. Come, come, what is this? Give me your hand.
There now, that's settled. I assure you it would be quite impossible for
me to work with him; I literally feel physically ill when I am in the
company of such people.

_Nora_ (_takes her hand out of his and goes to the opposite side of the
Christmas Tree_). How hot it is in here; and I have such a lot to do.

_Helmer_ (_getting up and putting his papers in order_). Yes, and I must
try and read through some of these before dinner; and I must think about
your costume, too. And it is just possible I may have something ready in
gold paper to hang up on the Tree. (_Puts his hand on her head.)_ My
precious little singing-bird! (_He goes into his room and shuts the door
after him.)_

_Nora_ (_after a pause, whispers_). No, no--it isn't true. It's
impossible; it must be impossible.

(_The_ NURSE _opens the door on the left._)

_Nurse_. The little ones are begging so hard to be allowed to come in to
mamma.

_Nora_. No, no, no! Don't let them come in to me! You stay with them,
Anne.

_Nurse_. Very well, ma'am. (_Shuts the door._)

_Nora_ (_pale with terror_). Deprave my little children? Poison my home?
(_A short pause. Then she tosses her head._) It's not true. It can't
possibly be true.





