ACT III


(THE SAME SCENE--_The table has been placed in the middle of the stage,
with chairs around it. A lamp is burning on the table. The door into the
hall stands open. Dance music is heard in the room above_. MRS. LINDE
_is sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book; she
tries to read, but does not seem able to collect her thoughts. Every now
and then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door_.)


_Mrs. Linde_ (_looking at her watch_). Not yet--and the time is nearly
up. If only he does not--. (_Listens again_.) Ah, there he is. (_Goes
into the hall and opens the outer door carefully. Light footsteps are
heard on the stairs. She whispers_.) Come in. There is no one here.

_Krogstad_ (_in the doorway_). I found a note from you at home. What
does this mean?

_Mrs. Linde_. It is absolutely necessary that I should have a talk with
you.

_Krogstad_. Really? And is it absolutely necessary that it should be
here?

_Mrs. Linde_. It is impossible where I live; there is no private
entrance to my rooms. Come in; we are quite alone. The maid is asleep,
and the Helmers are at the dance upstairs.

_Krogstad_ (_coming into the room_). Are the Helmers really at a dance
tonight?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, why not?

_Krogstad_. Certainly--why not?

_Mrs. Linde_. Now, Nils, let us have a talk.

_Krogstad_. Can we two have anything to talk about?

_Mrs. Linde_. We have a great deal to talk about.

_Krogstad_. I shouldn't have thought so.

_Mrs. Linde_. No, you have never properly understood me.

_Krogstad_. Was there anything else to understand except what was
obvious to all the world--a heartless woman jilts a man when a more
lucrative chance turns up.

_Mrs. Linde_. Do you believe I am as absolutely heartless as all that?
And do you believe that I did it with a light heart?

_Krogstad_. Didn't you?

_Mrs. Linde_. Nils, did you really think that?

_Krogstad_. If it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at
the time?

_Mrs. Linde_. I could do nothing else. As I had to break with you, it
was my duty also to put an end to all that you felt for me.

_Krogstad_ (_wringing his hands_). So that was it. And all this--only
for the sake of money.

_Mrs. Linde_. You must not forget that I had a helpless mother and two
little brothers. We couldn't wait for you, Nils; your prospects seemed
hopeless then.

_Krogstad_. That may be so, but you had no right to throw me over for
any one else's sake.

_Mrs. Linde_. Indeed I don't know. Many a time did I ask myself if I had
a right to do it.

_Krogstad_ (_more gently_). When I lost you, it was as if all the solid
ground went from under my feet. Look at me now--I am a shipwrecked man
clinging to a bit of wreckage.

_Mrs. Linde_. But help may be near.

_Krogstad_. It _was_ near; but then you came and stood in my way.

_Mrs. Linde_. Unintentionally, Nils. It was only today that I learnt it
was your place I was going to take in the bank.

_Krogstad_. I believe you, if you say so. But now that you know it, are
you not going to give it up to me?

_Mrs. Linde_. No, because that would not benefit you in the least.

_Krogstad_. Oh, benefit, benefit--I would have done it whether or no.

_Mrs. Linde_. I have learnt to act prudently. Life, and hard, bitter
necessity have taught me that.

_Krogstad_. And life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches.

_Mrs. Linde_. Then life has taught you something very reasonable. But
deeds you must believe in?

_Krogstad_. What do you mean by that?

_Mrs. Linde_. You said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some
wreckage.

_Krogstad_. I had good reason to say so.

_Mrs. Linde_. Well, I am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some
wreckage--no one to mourn for, no one to care for.

_Krogstad_. It was your own choice.

_Mrs. Linde_. There was no other choice, then.

_Krogstad_. Well, what now?

_Mrs. Linde_. Nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could
join forces?

_Krogstad_. What are you saying?

_Mrs. Linde_. Two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better
chance than each on their own.

_Krogstad_. Christine!

_Mrs. Linde_. What do you suppose brought me to town?

_Krogstad_. Do you mean that you gave me a thought?

_Mrs. Linde_. I could not endure life without work. All my life, as long
as I can remember, I have worked, and it has been my greatest and only
pleasure. But now I am quite alone in the world--my life is so dreadfully
empty and I feel so forsaken. There is not the least pleasure in working
for one's self. Nils, give me someone and something to work for.

_Krogstad_. I don't trust that. It is nothing but a woman's overstrained
sense of generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of your self.

_Mrs. Linde_. Have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?

_Krogstad_. Could you really do it? Tell me--do you know all about my
past life?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes.

_Krogstad_. And do you know what they think of me here?

_Mrs. Linde_. You seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been
quite another man.

_Krogstad_. I am certain of it.

_Mrs. Linde_. Is it too late now?

_Krogstad_. Christine, are you saying this deliberately? Yes, I am sure
you are. I see it in your face. Have you really the courage, then--?

_Mrs. Linde_. I want to be a mother to someone, and your children need a
mother. We two need each other. Nils, I have faith in your real
character--I can dare anything together with you.

_Krogstad_ (_grasps her hands_). Thanks, thanks, Christine! Now I shall
find a way to clear myself in the eyes of the world. Ah, but I forgot--

_Mrs. Linde_ (_listening_). Hush! The Tarantella! Go, go!

_Krogstad_. Why? What is it?

_Mrs. Linde_. Do you hear them up there? When that is over, we may
expect them back.

_Krogstad_. Yes, yes--I will go. But it is all no use. Of course you are
not aware what steps I have taken in the matter of the Helmers.

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, I know all about that.

_Krogstad_. And in spite of that have you the courage to--?

_Mrs. Linde_. I understand very well to what lengths a man like you
might be driven by despair.

_Krogstad_. If I could only undo what I have done!

_Mrs. Linde_. You cannot. Your letter is lying in the letter-box now.

_Krogstad_. Are you sure of that?

_Mrs. Linde_. Quite sure, but--

_Krogstad_ (_with a searching look at her_). Is that what it all
means?--that you want to save your friend at any cost? Tell me frankly.
Is that it?

_Mrs. Linde_. Nils, a woman who has once sold herself for another's
sake, doesn't do it a second time.

_Krogstad_. I will ask for my letter back.

_Mrs. Linde_. No, no.

_Krogstad_. Yes, of course I will. I will wait here till Helmer comes; I
will tell him he must give me my letter back--that it only concerns my
dismissal--that he is not to read it--

_Mrs. Linde_. No, Nils, you must not recall your letter.

_Krogstad._ But, tell me, wasn't it for that very purpose that you asked
me to meet you here?

_Mrs. Linde_. In my first moment of fright, it was. But twenty-four
hours have elapsed since then, and in that time I have witnessed
incredible things in this house. Helmer must know all about it. This
unhappy secret must be enclosed; they must have a complete understanding
between them, which is impossible with all this concealment and
falsehood going on.

_Krogstad_. Very well, if you will take the responsibility. But there is
one thing I can do in any case, and I shall do it at once.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_listening_). You must be quick and go! The dance is over;
we are not safe a moment longer.

_Krogstad_. I will wait for you below.

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, do. You must see me back to my door.

_Krogstad_. I have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my
life! (_Goes out through the outer door. The door between the room and
the hall remains open_.)

_Mrs. Linde_ (_tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready_).
What a difference! What a difference! Someone to work for and live
for--a home to bring comfort into. That I will do, indeed. I wish they
would be quick and come. (_Listens._) Ah, there they are now. I must put
on my things. (_Takes up her hat and cloak_. HELMER'S _and_ NORA'S
_voices are heard outside; a key is turned, and_ HELMER _brings_ NORA
_almost by force into the hall. She is in an Italian costume with a
large black shawl round her; he is in evening dress, and a black domino
which is flying open_.)

_Nora_ (_hanging back in the doorway, and struggling with him_). No, no,
no!--don't take me in. I want to go upstairs again; I don't want to
leave so early.

_Helmer_. But, my dearest Nora--

_Nora_. Please, Torvald dear--please, _please_--only an hour more.

_Helmer_. Not a single minute, my sweet Nora. You know that was our
agreement. Come along into the room; you are catching cold standing
there. (_He brings her gently into the room, in spite of her
resistance_.)

_Mrs. Linde_. Good evening.

_Nora_. Christine!

_Helmer_. You here, so late, Mrs. Linde?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, you must excuse me; I was so anxious to see Nora in
her dress.

_Nora_. Have you been sitting here waiting for me?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, unfortunately I came too late, you had already gone
upstairs; and I thought I couldn't go away again without having seen
you.

_Helmer_ (_taking off_ NORA'S _shawl_). Yes, take a good look at her. I
think she is worth looking at. Isn't she charming, Mrs. Linde?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, indeed she is.

_Helmer_. Doesn't she look remarkably pretty? Everyone thought so at the
dance. But she is terribly self-willed, this sweet little person. What
are we to do with her? You will hardly believe that I had almost to
bring her away by force.

_Nora_. Torvald, you will repent not having let me stay, even if it were
only for half an hour.

_Helmer_. Listen to her, Mrs. Linde! She had danced her Tarantella, and
it had been a tremendous success, as it deserved--although possibly the
performance was a trifle too realistic--little more so, I mean, than
was strictly compatible with the limitations of art. But never mind
about that! The chief thing is, she had made a success--she had made a
tremendous success. Do you think I was going to let her remain there
after that, and spoil the effect? No, indeed! I took my charming little
Capri maiden--my capricious little Capri maiden, I should say--on my
arm; took one quick turn round the room; a curtsey on either side, and,
as they say in novels, the beautiful apparition disappeared. An exit
ought always to be effective, Mrs. Linde; but that is what I cannot make
Nora understand. Pooh! this room is hot. (_Throws his domino on a chair,
and opens the door of his room_.) Hullo! it's all dark in here. Oh, of
course--excuse me--. (_He goes in, and lights some candles_.)

_Nora_ (_in a hurried and breathless whisper_). Well?

_Mrs. Linde._ (_in a low voice_). I have had a talk with him.

_Nora._ Yes, and--

_Mrs. Linde_. Nora, you must tell your husband all about it.

_Nora_ (_in an expressionless voice_). I knew it.

_Mrs. Linde._ You have nothing to be afraid of as far as Krogstad is
concerned; but you must tell him.

_Nora_. I won't tell him.

_Mrs. Linde_. Then the letter will.

_Nora_. Thank you, Christine. Now I know what I must do. Hush--!

_Helmer_ (_coming in again_). Well, Mrs. Linde, have you admired her?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, and now I will say good-night.

_Helmer_. What, already? Is this yours, this knitting?

_Mrs. Linde_ (_taking it_). Yes, thank you, I had very nearly forgotten
it.

_Helmer_. So you knit?

_Mrs. Linde_. Of course.

_Helmer_. Do you know, you ought to embroider?

_Mrs. Linde_. Really? Why?

_Helmer_. Yes, it's far more becoming. Let me show you. You hold the
embroidery thus in your left hand, and use the needle with the
right--like this--with a long, easy sweep. Do you see?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, perhaps--

_Helmer_. But in the case of knitting--that can never be anything but
ungraceful; look here--the arms close together, the knitting-needles
going up and down--it has a sort of Chinese effect--. That was really
excellent champagne they gave us.

_Mrs. Linde_. Well,--good-night, Nora, and don't be self-willed any
more.

_Helmer_. That's right, Mrs. Linde.

_Mrs. Linde_. Good-night, Mr. Helmer.

_Helmer_ (_accompanying her to the door_). Good-night, good-night. I
hope you will get home all right. I should be very happy to--but you
haven't any great distance to go. Good-night, good-night. (_She goes
out; he shuts the door after her and comes in again_.) Ah!--at last we
have got rid of her. She is a frightful bore, that woman.

_Nora_. Aren't you very tired, Torvald?

_Helmer_. No, not in the least.

_Nora_. Nor sleepy?

_Helmer_. Not a bit. On the contrary, I feel extraordinarily lively. And
you?--you really look both tired and sleepy.

_Nora_. Yes, I am very tired. I want to go to sleep at once.

_Helmer_. There, you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay
there any longer.

_Nora_. Everything you do is quite right, Torvald.

_Helmer_ (_kissing her on the forehead_). Now my little skylark is
speaking reasonably. Did you notice what good spirits Rank was in this
evening?

_Nora_. Really? Was he? I didn't speak to him at all.

_Helmer_. And I very little, but I have not for a long time seen him in
such good form. (_Looks for a while at her and then goes nearer to
her_.) It is delightful to be at home by ourselves again, to be all
alone with you--you fascinating, charming little darling!

_Nora_. Don't look at me like that, Torvald.

_Helmer_. Why shouldn't I look at my dearest treasure?--at all the
beauty that is mine, all my very own?

_Nora_ (_going to the other side of the table_). You mustn't say things
like that to me tonight.

_Helmer_ (_following her_). You have still got the Tarantella in your
blood, I see. And it makes you more captivating than ever. Listen--the
guests are beginning to go now. (_In a lower voice_.) Nora--soon the
whole house will be quiet.

_Nora_. Yes, I hope so.

_Helmer_. Yes, my own darling Nora. Do you know, when I am out at a
party with you like this, why I speak so little to you, keep away from
you, and only send a stolen glance in your direction now and then?--do
you know why I do that? It is because I make believe to myself that we
are secretly in love, and you are my secretly promised bride, and that
no one suspects there is anything between us.

_Nora_. Yes, yes--I know very well your thoughts are with me all the
time.

_Helmer_. And when we are leaving, and I am putting the shawl over your
beautiful young shoulders--on your lovely neck--then I imagine that you
are my young bride and that we have just come from the wedding, and I am
bringing you for the first time into our home--to be alone with you for
the first time--quite alone with my shy little darling! All this evening
I have longed for nothing but you. When I watched the seductive figures
of the Tarantella, my blood was on fire; I could endure it no longer,
and that was why I brought you down so early--

_Nora_. Go away, Torvald! You must let me go. I won't--

_Helmer_. What's that? You're joking, my little Nora! You won't--you
won't? Am I not your husband--? (_A knock is heard at the outer door_.)

_Nora_ (_starting_). Did you hear--?

_Helmer_ (_going into the hall_). Who is it?

_Rank_ (_outside_). It is I. May I come in for a moment?

_Helmer_ (_in a fretful whisper_). Oh, what does he want now? (_Aloud_.)
Wait a minute? (_Unlocks the door_.) Come, that's kind of you not to
pass by our door.

_Rank_. I thought I heard your voice, and felt as if I should like to
look in. (_With a swift glance round_.) Ah, yes!--these dear familiar
rooms. You are very happy and cosy in here, you two.

_Helmer_. It seems to me that you looked after yourself pretty well
upstairs too.

_Rank_. Excellently. Why shouldn't I? Why shouldn't one enjoy everything
in this world?--at any rate as much as one can, and as long as one can.
The wine was capital--

_Helmer_. Especially the champagne.

_Rank_. So you noticed that too? It is almost incredible how much I
managed to put away!

_Nora_. Torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight, too.

_Rank_. Did he?

_Nora_. Yes, and he is always in such good spirits afterwards.

_Rank_. Well, why should one not enjoy a merry evening after a
well-spent day?

_Helmer_. Well spent? I am afraid I can't take credit for that.

_Rank_ (_clapping him on the back_). But I can, you know!

_Nora_. Doctor Rank, you must have been occupied with some scientific
investigation today.

_Rank_. Exactly.

_Helmer_. Just listen!--little Nora talking about scientific
investigations!

_Nora_. And may I congratulate you on the result?

_Rank_. Indeed you may.

_Nora_. Was it favourable, then.

_Rank_. The best possible, for both doctor and patient--certainty.

_Nora_ (_quickly and searchingly_). Certainty?

_Rank_. Absolute certainty. So wasn't I entitled to make a merry evening
of it after that?

_Nora_. Yes, you certainly were, Doctor Rank.

_Helmer_. I think so too, so long as you don't have to pay for it in the
morning.

_Rank_. Oh well, one can't have anything in this life without paying for
it.

_Nora_. Doctor Rank--are you fond of fancy-dress balls?

_Rank_. Yes, if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes.

_Nora_. Tell me--what shall we two wear at the next?

_Helmer_. Little featherbrain!--are you thinking of the next already?

_Rank_. We two? Yes, I can tell you. You shall go as a good fairy--

_Helmer_. Yes, but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for
that?

_Rank_. Let your wife go dressed just as she is in every-day life.

_Helmer_. That was really very prettily turned. But can't you tell us
what you will be?

_Rank_. Yes, my dear friend, I have quite made up my mind about that.

_Helmer_. Well?

_Rank_. At the next fancy-dress ball I shall be invisible.

_Helmer_ That's a good joke!

_Rank_. There is a big black hat--have you never heard of hats that make
you invisible? If you put one on, no one can see you.

_Helmer_ (_suppressing a smile_). Yes, you are quite right.

_Rank_. But I am clean forgetting what I came for. Helmer, give me a
cigar--one of the dark Havanas.

_Helmer_. With the greatest pleasure. (_Offers him his case_.)

_Rank_ (_takes a cigar and cuts off the end_). Thanks.

_Nora_ (_striking a match_). Let me give you a light.

_Rank_. Thank you. (_She holds the match for him to light his cigar_.)
And now good-bye!

_Helmer_. Good-bye, good-bye, dear old man!

_Nora_. Sleep well, Doctor Rank.

_Rank_. Thank you for that wish.

_Nora_. Wish me the same.

_Rank_. You? Well, if you want me to sleep well! And thanks for the
light. (_He nods to them both and goes out_.)

_Helmer_ (_in a subdued voice_). He has drunk more than he ought.

_Nora_ (_absently_). Maybe. (HELMER _takes a bunch of keys out of his
pocket and goes into the hall_.) Torvald! what are you going to do
there?

_Helmer_. Empty the letter-box; it is quite full; there will be no room
to put the newspaper in to-morrow morning.

_Nora._ Are you going to work to-night?

_Helmer_. You know quite well I'm not. What is this? Some one has been
at the lock.

_Nora_. At the lock?

_Helmer_. Yes, someone has. What can it mean? I should never have
thought the maid--. Here is a broken hairpin. Nora, it is one of yours.

_Nora_ (_quickly_). Then it must have been the children--

_Helmer_. Then you must get them out of those ways. There, at last I
have got it open. (_Takes out the contents of the letter-box, and calls
to the kitchen_.) Helen!--Helen, put out the light over the front door.
(_Goes back into the room and shuts the door into the hall. He holds out
his hand full of letters_.) Look at that--look what a heap of them there
are. (_Turning them over_.) What on earth is that?

_Nora_ (_at the window_). The letter--No! Torvald, no!

_Helmer._ Two cards--of Rank's.

_Nora._ Of Doctor Rank's?

_Helmer_ (_looking at them_). Doctor Rank. They were on the top. He must
have put them in when he went out.

_Nora._ Is there anything written on them?

_Helmer._ There is a black cross over the name. Look there--what an
uncomfortable idea! It looks as If he were announcing his own death.

_Nora._ It is just what he is doing.

_Helmer._ What? Do you know anything about it? Has he said anything to
you?

_Nora._ Yes. He told me that when the cards came it would be his
leave-taking from us. He means to shut himself up and die.

_Helmer._ My poor old friend. Certainly I knew we should not have him
very long with us. But so soon! And so he hides himself away like a
wounded animal.

_Nora._ If it has to happen, it is best it should be without a
word--don't you think so, Torvald?

_Helmer_ (_walking up and down_). He has so grown into our lives. I
can't think of him as having gone out of them. He, with his sufferings
and his loneliness, was like a cloudy background to our sunlit
happiness. Well, perhaps it is best so. For him, anyway. (_Standing
still._) And perhaps for us too, Nora. We two are thrown quite upon each
other now. (_Puts his arms around her._) My darling wife, I don't feel
as if I could hold you tight enough. Do you know, Nora, I have often
wished that you might be threatened by some great danger, so that I
might risk my life's blood, and everything, for your sake.

_Nora_ (_disengages herself, and says firmly and decidedly_). Now you
must read your letters, Torvald.

_Helmer._ No, no; not tonight. I want to be with you, my darling wife.

_Nora._ With the thought of your friend's death--

_Helmer._ You are right, it has affected us both. Something ugly has
come between us--the thought of the horrors of death. We must try and
rid our minds of that. Until then--we will each go to our own room.

_Nora_ (_hanging on his neck_). Good-night, Torvald--Good-night!

_Helmer_ (_kissing her on the forehead_). Good-night, my little
singing-bird. Sleep sound, Nora. Now I will read my letters through.
(_He takes his letters and goes into his room, shutting the door after
him._)

_Nora_ (_gropes distractedly about, seizes_ HELMER'S _domino, throws it
round her, while she says in quick, hoarse, spasmodic whispers_). Never
to see him again. Never! Never! (_Puts her shawl over her head._) Never
to see my children again either--never again. Never! Never!--Ah! the
icy, black water--the unfathomable depths--If only it were over! He has
got it now--now he is reading it. Good-bye, Torvald and my children!
(_She is about to rush out through the hall, when_ HELMER _opens his
door hurriedly and stands with an open letter in his hand._)

_Helmer._ Nora!

_Nora._ Ah!--

_Helmer._ What is this? Do you know what is in this letter?

_Nora._ Yes, I know. Let me go! Let me get out!

_Helmer_ (_holding her back_). Where are you going?

_Nora_ (_trying to get free_). You shan't save me, Torvald!

_Helmer_ (_reeling_). True? Is this true, that I read here? Horrible!
No, no--it is impossible that it can be true.

_Nora._ It is true. I have loved you above everything else in the world.

_Helmer._ Oh, don't let us have any silly excuses.

_Nora_ (_taking a step towards him_). Torvald--!

_Helmer._ Miserable creature--what have you done?

_Nora._ Let me go. You shall not suffer for my sake. You shall not take
it upon yourself.

_Helmer._ No tragedy airs, please. (_Locks the hall door._) Here you
shall stay and give me an explanation. Do you understand what you have
done? Answer me? Do you understand what you have done?

_Nora_ (_looks steadily at him and says with a growing look of coldness
in her face_). Yes, now I am beginning to understand thoroughly.

_Helmer_ (_walking about the room_). What a horrible awakening! All
these eight years--she who was my joy and pride--a hypocrite, a
liar--worse, worse--a criminal! The unutterable ugliness of it all!--For
shame! For shame! (NORA _is silent and looks steadily at him. He stops
in front of her._) I ought to have suspected that something of the sort
would happen. I ought to have foreseen it. All your father's want of
principle--be silent!--all your father's want of principle has come out
in you. No religion, no morality, no sense of duty--How I am punished
for having winked at what he did! I did it for your sake, and this is
how you repay me.

_Nora._ Yes, that's just it.

_Helmer._ Now you have destroyed all my happiness. You have ruined
all my future. It is horrible to think of! I am in the power of an
unscrupulous man; he can do what he likes with me, ask anything he likes
of me, give me any orders he pleases--I dare not refuse. And I must sink
to such miserable depths because of a thoughtless woman!

_Nora._ When I am out of the way, you will be free.

_Helmer._ No fine speeches, please. Your father had always plenty of
those ready, too. What good would it be to me if you were out of the
way, as you say? Not the slightest. He can make the affair known
everywhere; and if he does, I may be falsely suspected of having been
a party to your criminal action. Very likely people will think I was
behind it all--that it was I who prompted you! And I have to thank you
for all this--you whom I have cherished during the whole of our married
life. Do you understand now what it is you have done for me?

_Nora_ (_coldly and quietly_). Yes.

_Helmer._ It is so incredible that I can't take it in. But we must come
to some understanding. Take off that shawl. Take it off, I tell you. I
must try and appease him some way or another. The matter must be hushed
up at any cost. And as for you and me, it must appear as if everything
between us were as before--but naturally only in the eyes of the world.
You will still remain in my house, that is a matter of course. But I
shall not allow you to bring up the children; I dare not trust them to
you. To think that I should be obliged to say so to one whom I have
loved so dearly, and whom I still--. No, that is all over. From this
moment happiness is not the question; all that concerns us is to save
the remains, the fragments, the appearance--

(_A ring is heard at the front-door bell._)

_Helmer_ (_with a start_). What is that? So late! Can the worst--? Can
he--? Hide yourself, Nora. Say you are ill.

(NORA _stands motionless._ HELMER _goes and unlocks the hall door._)

_Maid_ (_half-dressed, comes to the door_). A letter for the mistress.

_Helmer._ Give it to me. (_Takes the letter, and shuts the door._) Yes,
it is from him. You shall not have it; I will read it myself.

_Nora._ Yes, read it.

_Helmer_ (_standing by the lamp_). I scarcely have the courage to do it.
It may mean ruin for both of us. No, I must know. (_Tears open the
letter, runs his eye over a few lines, looks at a paper enclosed, and
gives a shout of joy._) Nora! (_She looks at him, questioningly._) Nora!
No, I must read it once again--. Yes, it is true! I am saved! Nora, I am
saved!

_Nora._ And I?

_Helmer._ You too, of course; we are both saved, both saved, both you
and I. Look, he sends you your bond back. He says he regrets and
repents--that a happy change in his life--never mind what he says! We
are saved, Nora! No one can do anything to you. Oh, Nora, Nora!--no,
first I must destroy these hateful things. Let me see--. (_Takes a look
at the bond._) No, no, I won't look at it. The whole thing shall be
nothing but a bad dream to me. (_Tears up the bond and both letters,
throws them all into the stove, and watches them burn._) There--now it
doesn't exist any longer. He says that since Christmas Eve you--. These
must have been three dreadful days for you, Nora.

_Nora._ I have fought a hard fight these three days.

_Helmer._ And suffered agonies, and seen no way out but--. No, we won't
call any of the horrors to mind. We will only shout with joy, and keep
saying, "It's all over! It's all over!" Listen to me, Nora. You don't
seem to realise that it is all over. What is this?--such a cold, set
face! My poor little Nora, I quite understand; you don't feel as if you
could believe that I have forgiven you. But it is true, Nora, I swear
it; I have forgiven you everything. I know that what you did, you did
out of love for me.

_Nora._ That is true.

_Helmer._ You have loved me as a wife ought to love her husband. Only
you had not sufficient knowledge to judge of the means you used. But do
you suppose you are any the less dear to me, because you don't
understand how to act on your own responsibility? No, no; only lean on
me; I will advise you and direct you. I should not be a man if this
womanly helplessness did not just give you a double attractiveness in my
eyes. You must not think any more about the hard things I said in my
first moment of consternation, when I thought everything was going to
overwhelm me. I have forgiven you, Nora; I swear to you I have forgiven
you.

_Nora._ Thank you for your forgiveness. (_She goes out through the door
to the right._)

_Helmer._ No, don't go--. (_Looks in._) What are you doing in there?

_Nora_ (_from within_). Taking off my fancy dress.

_Helmer_ (_standing at the open door_). Yes, do. Try and calm yourself,
and make your mind easy again, my frightened little singing-bird. Be at
rest, and feel secure; I have broad wings to shelter you under. (_Walks
up and down by the door._) How warm and cosy our home is, Nora. Here is
shelter for you; here I will protect you like a hunted dove that I have
saved from a hawk's claws; I will bring peace to your poor beating
heart. It will come, little by little, Nora, believe me. To-morrow
morning you will look upon it all quite differently; soon everything
will be just as it was before. Very soon you won't need me to assure you
that I have forgiven you; you will yourself feel the certainty that I
have done so. Can you suppose I should ever think of such a thing as
repudiating you, or even reproaching you? You have no idea what a true
man's heart is like, Nora. There is something so indescribably sweet and
satisfying, to a man, in the knowledge that he has forgiven his
wife--forgiven her freely, and with all his heart. It seems as if that
had made her, as it were, doubly his own; he has given her a new life,
so to speak; and she is in a way become both wife and child to him. So
you shall be for me after this, my little scared, helpless darling. Have
no anxiety about anything, Nora; only be frank and open with me, and I
will serve as will and conscience both to you--. What is this? Not gone
to bed? Have you changed your things?

_Nora_ (_in everyday dress_). Yes, Torvald, I have changed my things
now.

_Helmer._ But what for?--so late as this.

_Nora._ I shall not sleep tonight.

_Helmer._ But, my dear Nora--

_Nora_ (_looking at her watch_). It is not so very late. Sit down here,
Torvald. You and I have much to say to one another. (_She sits down at
one side of the table_.)

_Helmer._ Nora--what is this?--this cold, set face?

_Nora._ Sit down. It will take some time; I have a lot to talk over with
you.

_Helmer_ (_sits down at the opposite side of the table_). You alarm me,
Nora!--and I don't understand you.

_Nora._ No, that is just it. You don't understand me, and I have never
understood you either--before tonight. No, you mustn't interrupt me. You
must simply listen to what I say. Torvald, this is a settling of
accounts.

_Helmer._ What do you mean by that?

_Nora_ (_after a short silence_). Isn't there one thing that strikes you
as strange in our sitting here like this?

_Helmer._ What is that?

_Nora._ We have been married now eight years. Does it not occur to you
that this is the first time we two, you and I, husband and wife, have
had a serious conversation?

_Helmer._ What do you mean by serious?

_Nora._ In all these eight years--longer than that--from the very
beginning of our acquaintance, we have never exchanged a word on any
serious subject.

_Helmer._ Was it likely that I would be continually and forever telling
you about worries that you could not help me to bear?

_Nora._ I am not speaking about business matters. I say that we have
never sat down in earnest together to try and get at the bottom of
anything.

_Helmer._ But, dearest Nora, would it have been any good to you?

_Nora._ That is just it; you have never understood me. I have been
greatly wronged, Torvald--first by papa and then by you.

_Helmer._ What! By us two--by us two, who have loved you better than
anyone else in in the world?

_Nora_ (_shaking her head_). You have never loved me. You have only
thought it pleasant to be in love with me.

_Helmer._ Nora, what do I hear you saying?

_Nora._ It is perfectly true, Torvald. When I was at home with papa, he
told me his opinion about everything, and so I had the same opinions;
and if I differed from him I concealed the fact, because he would not
have liked it. He called me his doll-child, and he played with me just
as I used to play with my dolls. And when I came to live with you--

_Helmer._ What sort of an expression is that to use about our marriage?

_Nora_ (_undisturbed_). I mean that I was simply transferred from papa's
hands into yours. You arranged everything according to your own taste,
and so I got the same tastes as you--or else I pretended to, I am really
not quite sure which--I think sometimes the one and sometimes the other.
When I look back on it, it seems to me as if I had been living here like
a poor woman--just from hand to mouth. I have existed merely to perform
tricks for you, Torvald. But you would have it so. You and papa have
committed a great sin against me. It is your fault that I have made
nothing of my life.

_Helmer_. How unreasonable and how ungrateful you are, Nora! Have you
not been happy here?

_Nora_. No, I have never been happy. I thought I was, but it has never
really been so.

_Helmer_. Not--not happy!

_Nora_. No, only merry. And you have always been so kind to me. But our
home has been nothing but a playroom. I have been your doll-wife, just
as at home I was papa's doll-child; and here the children have been my
dolls. I thought it great fun when you played with me, just as they
thought it great fun when I played with them. That is what our marriage
has been, Torvald.

_Helmer_. There is some truth in what you say--exaggerated and strained
as your view of it is. But for the future it shall be different.
Playtime shall be over, and lesson-time shall begin.

_Nora_. Whose lessons? Mine, or the children's?

_Helmer_. Both yours and the children's, my darling Nora.

_Nora_. Alas, Torvald, you are not the man to educate me into being a
proper wife for you.

_Helmer_. And you can say that!

_Nora_. And I--how am I fitted to bring up the children?

_Helmer_. Nora!

_Nora_. Didn't you say so yourself a little while ago--that you dare not
trust me to bring them up?

_Helmer_. In a moment of anger! Why do you pay any heed to that?

_Nora_. Indeed, you were perfectly right. I am not fit for the task.
There is another task I must undertake first. I must try and educate
myself--you are not the man to help me in that. I must do that for
myself. And that is why I am going to leave you now.

_Helmer_ (_springing up_). What do you say?

_Nora_. I must stand quite alone, if I am to understand myself and
everything about me. It is for that reason that I cannot remain with you
any longer.

_Helmer_. Nora, Nora!

_Nora_. I am going away from here now, at once. I am sure Christine will
take me in for the night--

_Helmer_. You are out of your mind! I won't allow it! I forbid you!

_Nora_. It is no use forbidding me anything any longer. I will take with
me what belongs to myself. I will take nothing from you, either now or
later.

_Helmer_. What sort of madness is this!

_Nora_. Tomorrow I shall go home--I mean to my old home. It will be
easiest for me to find something to do there.

_Helmer_. You blind, foolish woman!

_Nora_. I must try and get some sense, Torvald.

_Helmer_. To desert your home, your husband and your children! And you
don't consider what people will say!

_Nora_. I cannot consider that at all. I only know that it is necessary
for me.

_Helmer_. It's shocking. This is how you would neglect your most sacred
duties.

_Nora_. What do you consider my most sacred duties?

_Helmer_. Do I need to tell you that? Are they not your duties to your
husband and your children?

_Nora_. I have other duties just as sacred.

_Helmer_. That you have not. What duties could those be?

_Nora_. Duties to myself.

_Helmer_. Before all else, you are a wife and mother.

_Nora_. I don't believe that any longer. I believe that before all else
I am a reasonable human being, just as you are--or, at all events, that
I must try and become one. I know quite well, Torvald, that most people
would think you right, and that views of that kind are to be found in
books; but I can no longer content myself with what most people say, or
with what is found in books. I must think over things for myself and get
to understand them.

_Helmer_. Can you not understand your place in your own home? Have you
not a reliable guide in such matters as that?--have you no religion?

_Nora_. I am afraid, Torvald, I do not exactly know what religion is.

_Helmer_. What are you saying?

_Nora_. I know nothing but what the clergyman said, when I went to be
confirmed. He told us that religion was this, and that, and the other.
When I am away from all this, and am alone, I will look into that matter
too. I will see if what the clergyman said is true, or at all events if
it is true for me.

_Helmer_. This is unheard of in a girl of your age! But if religion
cannot lead you aright, let me try and awaken your conscience. I suppose
you have some moral sense? Or--answer me--am I to think you have none?

_Nora_. I assure you, Torvald, that is not an easy question to answer.
I really don't know. The thing perplexes me altogether. I only know that
you and I look at it in quite a different light. I am learning, too,
that the law is quite another thing from what I supposed; but I find it
impossible to convince myself that the law is right. According to it a
woman has no right to spare her old dying father, or to save her
husband's life. I can't believe that.

_Helmer_. You talk like a child. You don't understand the conditions of
the world in which you live.

_Nora_. No, I don't. But now I am going to try. I am going to see if I
can make out who is right, the world or I.

_Helmer_. You are ill, Nora; you are delirious; I almost think you are
out of your mind.

_Nora_. I have never felt my mind so clear and certain as to-night.

_Helmer_. And is it with a clear and certain mind that you forsake your
husband and your children?

_Nora_. Yes, it is.

_Helmer_. Then there is only one possible explanation.

_Nora_. What is that?

_Helmer_. You do not love me any more.

_Nora_. No, that is just it.

_Helmer_. Nora!--and you can say that?

_Nora_. It gives me great pain, Torvald, for you have always been so
kind to me, but I cannot help it. I do not love you any more.

_Helmer_ (_regaining his composure_). Is that a clear and certain
conviction too?

_Nora_. Yes, absolutely clear and certain. That is the reason why I will
not stay here any longer.

_Helmer_. And can you tell me what I have done to forfeit your love?

_Nora_. Yes, indeed I can. It was to-night, when the wonderful thing did
not happen; then I saw you were not the man I had thought you.

_Helmer_. Explain yourself better--I don't understand you.

_Nora_. I have waited so patiently for eight years; for, goodness knows,
I knew very well that wonderful things don't happen every day. Then this
horrible misfortune came upon me; and then I felt quite certain that the
wonderful thing was going to happen at last. When Krogstad's letter was
lying out there, never for a moment did I imagine that you would consent
to accept this man's conditions. I was so absolutely certain that you
would say to him: Publish the thing to the whole world. And when that
was done--

_Helmer_. Yes, what then?--when I had exposed my wife to shame and
disgrace?

_Nora_. When that was done, I was so absolutely certain, you would come
forward and take everything upon yourself, and say: I am the guilty one.

_Helmer_. Nora--!

_Nora_. You mean that I would never have accepted such a sacrifice on
your part? No, of course not. But what would my assurances have been
worth against yours? That was the wonderful thing which I hoped for and
feared; and it was to prevent that, that I wanted to kill myself.

_Helmer_. I would gladly work night and day for you, Nora--bear sorrow
and want for your sake. But no man would sacrifice his honour for the
one he loves.

_Nora_. It is a thing hundreds of thousands of women have done.

_Helmer_. Oh, you think and talk like a heedless child.

_Nora_. Maybe. But you neither think nor talk like the man I could bind
myself to. As soon as your fear was over--and it was not fear for what
threatened me, but for what might happen to you--when the whole thing
was past, as far as you were concerned it was exactly as if nothing at
all had happened. Exactly as before, I was your little skylark, your
doll, which you would in future treat with doubly gentle care, because
it was so brittle and fragile. (_Getting up_.) Torvald--it was then it
dawned upon me that for eight years I had been living here with a
strange man, and had borne him three children--. Oh! I can't bear to
think of it! I could tear myself into little bits!

_Helmer_ (_sadly_). I see, I see. An abyss has opened between us--there
is no denying it. But, Nora, would it not be possible to fill it up?

_Nora_. As I am now, I am no wife for you.

_Helmer_. I have it in me to become a different man.

_Nora_. Perhaps--if your doll is taken away from you.

_Helmer_. But to part!--to part from you! No, no, Nora, I can't
understand that idea.

_Nora_ (_going out to the right_). That makes it all the more certain
that it must be done. (_She comes back with her cloak and hat and a
small bag which she puts on a chair by the table_.)

_Helmer_. Nora, Nora, not now! Wait till tomorrow.

_Nora_ (_putting on her cloak_). I cannot spend the night in a strange
man's room.

_Helmer_. But can't we live here like brother and sister--?

_Nora_ (_putting on her hat_). You know very well that would not last
long. (_Puts the shawl round her_.) Good-bye, Torvald. I won't see the
little ones. I know they are in better hands than mine. As I am now, I
can be of no use to them.

_Helmer_. But some day, Nora--some day?

_Nora_. How can I tell? I have no idea what is going to become of me.

_Helmer_. But you are my wife, whatever becomes of you.

_Nora_. Listen, Torvald. I have heard that when a wife deserts her
husband's house, as I am doing now, he is legally freed from all
obligations towards her. In any case I set you free from all your
obligations. You are not to feel yourself bound in the slightest way,
any more than I shall. There must be perfect freedom on both sides.
See, here is your ring back. Give me mine.

_Helmer_. That too?

_Nora_. That too.

_Helmer_. Here it is.

_Nora_. That's right. Now it is all over. I have put the keys here.
The maids know all about everything in the house--better than I do.
Tomorrow, after I have left her, Christine will come here and pack up
my own things that I brought with me from home. I will have them sent
after me.

_Helmer_. All over! All over!--Nora, shall you never think of me again?

_Nora_. I know I shall often think of you and the children and this
house.

_Helmer_. May I write to you, Nora?

_Nora_. No--never. You must not do that.

_Helmer_. But at least let me send you--

_Nora_. Nothing--nothing--

_Helmer_. Let me help you if you are in want.

_Nora_. No. I can receive nothing from a stranger.

_Helmer_. Nora--can I never be anything more than a stranger to you?

_Nora_ (_taking her bag_). Ah, Torvald, the most wonderful thing of all
would have to happen.

_Helmer_. Tell me what that would be!

_Nora_. Both you and I would have to be so changed that--. Oh, Torvald,
I don't believe any longer in wonderful things happening.

_Helmer_. But I will believe in it. Tell me? So changed that--?

_Nora_. That our life together would be a real wedlock. Good-bye. (_She
goes out through the hall_.)

_Helmer_ (_sinks down on a chair at the door and buries his face in his
hands_). Nora! Nora! (_Looks round, and rises_.) Empty. She is gone. (_A
hope flashes across his mind_.) The most wonderful thing of all--?

(_The sound of a door shutting is heard from below_.)


