ACT II


(THE SAME SCENE--_The Christmas Tree is in the corner by the piano,
stripped of its ornaments and with burnt-down candle-ends on its
dishevelled branches._ NORA'S _cloak and hat are lying on the sofa. She
is alone in the room, walking about uneasily. She stops by the sofa and
takes up her cloak._)

_Nora_ (_drops the cloak_). Someone is coming now! (_Goes to the door
and listens._) No--it is no one. Of course, no one will come today,
Christmas Day--nor tomorrow either. But, perhaps--(_opens the door and
looks out_.) No, nothing in the letter-box; it is quite empty. (_Comes
forward._) What rubbish! of course he can't be in earnest about it. Such
a thing couldn't happen; it is impossible--I have three little children.

(_Enter the_ NURSE _from the room on the left, carrying a big cardboard
box._)

_Nurse_. At last I have found the box with the fancy dress.

_Nora_. Thanks; put it on the table.

_Nurse_ (_doing so_). But it is very much in want of mending.

_Nora_. I should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces.

_Nurse_. What an idea! It can easily be put in order--just a little
patience.

_Nora_. Yes, I will go and get Mrs. Linde to come and help me with it.

_Nurse_. What, out again? In this horrible weather? You will catch cold,
ma'am, and make yourself ill.

_Nora_. Well, worse than that might happen. How are the children?

_Nurse_. The poor little souls are playing with their Christmas
presents, but--

_Nora_. Do they ask much for me?

_Nurse_. You see, they are so accustomed to have their mamma with them.

_Nora_. Yes, but, nurse, I shall not be able to be so much with them now
as I was before.

_Nurse_. Oh well, young children easily get accustomed to anything.

_Nora_. Do you think so? Do you think they would forget their mother if
she went away altogether?

_Nurse_. Good heavens!--went away altogether?

_Nora_. Nurse, I want you to tell me something I have often wondered
about--how could you have the heart to put your own child out among
strangers?

_Nurse_. I was obliged to, if I wanted to be little Nora's nurse.

_Nora_. Yes, but how could you be willing to do it?

_Nurse_. What, when I was going to get such a good place by it? A poor
girl who has got into trouble should be glad to. Besides, that wicked
man didn't do a single thing for me.

_Nora_. But I suppose your daughter has quite forgotten you.

_Nurse_. No, indeed she hasn't. She wrote to me when she was confirmed,
and when she was married.

_Nora_ (_putting her arms round her neck_). Dear old Anne, you were a
good mother to me when I was little.

_Nurse_. Little Nora, poor dear, had no other mother but me.

_Nora_. And if my little ones had no other mother, I am sure you
would--What nonsense I am talking! (_Opens the box._) Go in to them. Now
I must--. You will see tomorrow how charming I shall look.

_Nurse_. I am sure there will be no one at the ball so charming as you,
ma'am. (_Goes into the room on the left._)

_Nora_ (_begins to unpack the box, but soon pushes it away from her_).
If only I dared go out. If only no one would come. If only I could be
sure nothing would happen here in the meantime. Stuff and nonsense! No
one will come. Only I mustn't think about it. I will brush my muff. What
lovely, lovely gloves! Out of my thoughts, out of my thoughts! One, two,
three, four, five, six--(_Screams._) Ah! there is someone coming--.
(_Makes a movement towards the door, but stands irresolute_.)

(_Enter_ MRS. LINDE _from the hall, where she has taken off her cloak
and hat_.)

_Nora_. Oh, it's you, Christine. There is no one else out there, is
there? How good of you to come!

_Mrs. Linde_. I heard you were up asking for me.

_Nora_. Yes, I was passing by. As a matter of fact, it is something you
could help me with. Let us sit down here on the sofa. Look here.
Tomorrow evening there is to be a fancy-dress ball at the Stenborgs',
who live above us; and Torvald wants me to go as a Neapolitan
fisher-girl, and dance the Tarantella that I learnt at Capri.

_Mrs. Linde_. I see; you are going to keep up the character.

_Nora_. Yes, Torvald wants me to. Look, here is the dress; Torvald had
it made for me there, but now it is all so torn, and I haven't any
idea--

_Mrs. Linde_. We will easily put that right. It is only some of the
trimming come unsewn here and there. Needle and thread? Now then, that's
all we want.

_Nora_. It _is_ nice of you.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_sewing_). So you are going to be dressed up tomorrow,
Nora. I will tell you what--I shall come in for a moment and see you in
your fine feathers. But I have completely forgotten to thank you for a
delightful evening yesterday.

_Nora_ (_gets up, and crosses the stage_). Well I don't think yesterday
was as pleasant as usual. You ought to have come to town a little
earlier, Christine. Certainly Torvald does understand how to make a
house dainty and attractive.

_Mrs. Linde_. And so do you, it seems to me; you are not your father's
daughter for nothing. But tell me, is Doctor Rank always as depressed as
he was yesterday?

_Nora_. No; yesterday it was very noticeable. I must tell you that he
suffers from a _very_ dangerous disease. He has consumption of the
spine, poor creature. His father was a horrible man who committed all
sorts of excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do
you understand?

_Mrs. Linde_ (_dropping her sewing_). But, my dearest Nora, how do you
know anything about such things?

_Nora_ (_walking about_). Pooh! When you have three children, you get
visits now and then from--from married women, who know something of
medical matters, and they talk about one thing and another.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_goes on sewing. A short silence_). Does Doctor Rank come
here every day?

_Nora_. Every day regularly. He is Torvald's most intimate friend, and a
great friend of mine too. He is just like one of the family.

_Mrs. Linde_. But tell me this--is he perfectly sincere? I mean, isn't
he the kind of a man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?

_Nora_. Not in the least. What makes you think that?

_Mrs. Linde_. When you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he
had often heard my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards I
noticed that your husband hadn't the slightest idea who I was. So how
could Doctor Rank--?

_Nora_. That is quite right, Christine. Torvald is so absurdly fond of
me that he wants me absolutely to himself, as he says. At first he used
to seem almost jealous if I mentioned any of the dear folk at home, so
naturally I gave up doing so. But I often talk about such things with
Doctor Rank, because he likes hearing about them.

_Mrs. Linde_. Listen to me, Nora. You are still very like a child in
many ways, and I am older than you in many ways and have a little more
experience. Let me tell you this--you ought to make an end of it with
Doctor Rank.

_Nora_. What ought I to make an end of?

_Mrs. Linde_. Of two things, I think. Yesterday you talked some nonsense
about a rich admirer who was to leave you money--

_Nora_. An admirer who doesn't exist, unfortunately! But what then?

_Mrs. Linde_. Is Doctor Rank a man of means?

_Nora_. Yes, he is.

_Mrs. Linde_. And has no one to provide for?

_Nora_. No, no one; but--

_Mrs. Linde_. And comes here every day?

_Nora_. Yes, I told you so.

_Mrs. Linde_. But how can this well-bred man be so tactless?

_Nora_. I don't understand you at all.

_Mrs. Linde_. Don't prevaricate, Nora. Do you suppose I don't guess who
lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds.

_Nora_. Are you out of your senses? How can you think of such a thing! A
friend of ours, who comes here every day! Do you realise what a horribly
painful position that would be?

_Mrs. Linde_. Then it really isn't he?

_Nora_. No, certainly not. It would never have entered into my head for
a moment. Besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money
afterwards.

_Mrs. Linde_. Well, I think that was lucky for you, my dear Nora.

_Nora_. No, it would never have come into my head to ask Doctor Rank.
Although I am quite sure that if I had asked him--

_Mrs. Linde_. But of course you won't.

_Nora_. Of course not. I have no reason to think it could possibly be
necessary. But I am quite sure that if I told Doctor Rank--

_Mrs. Linde_. Behind your husband's back?

_Nora_. I must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be
behind his back too. I _must_ make an end of it with him.

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, that is what I told you yesterday, but--

_Nora_ (_walking up and down_). A man can put a thing like that straight
much easier than a woman--

_Mrs. Linde_. One's husband, yes.

_Nora_. Nonsense! (_Standing still_.) When you pay off a debt you get
your bond back, don't you?

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, as a matter of course.

_Nora_. And can tear it into a hundred thousand pieces, and burn it
up--the nasty, dirty paper!

_Mrs. Linde_ (_looks hard at her, lays down her sewing and gets up
slowly_). Nora, you are concealing something from me.

_Nora_. Do I look as if I were?

_Mrs. Linde_. Something has happened to you since yesterday morning.
Nora, what is it?

_Nora_ (_going nearer to her_). Christine! (_Listens_.) Hush! there's
Torvald come home. Do you mind going in to the children for the present?
Torvald can't bear to see dressmaking going on. Let Anne help you.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_gathering some of the things together_). Certainly--but I
am not going away from here till we have had it out with one another.
(_She goes into the room, on the left, as Helmer comes in from, the
hall_.)

_Nora_ (_going up to_ HELMAR). I have wanted you so much, Torvald dear.

_Helmer_. Was that the dressmaker?

_Nora_. No, it was Christine; she is helping me to put my dress in
order. You will see I shall look quite smart.

_Helmer_. Wasn't that a happy thought of mine, now?

_Nora_. Splendid! But don't you think it is nice of me, too, to do as
you wish?

_Helmer_. Nice?--because you do as your husband wishes? Well, well, you
little rogue, I am sure you did not mean it in that way. But I am not
going to disturb you; you will want to be trying on your dress, I
expect.

_Nora_. I suppose you are going to work.

_Helmer_. Yes. (_Shows her a bundle of papers_.) Look at that. I have
just been into the bank. (_Turns to go into his room_.)

_Nora_. Torvald.

_Helmer_. Yes.

_Nora_. If your little squirrel were to ask you for something very, very
prettily--?

_Helmer_. What then?

_Nora_. Would you do it?

_Helmer_. I should like to hear what it is, first.

_Nora_. Your squirrel would run about and do all her tricks if you would
be nice, and do what she wants.

_Helmer_. Speak plainly.

_Nora_. Your skylark would chirp about in every room, with her song
rising and falling--

_Helmer_. Well, my skylark does that anyhow.

_Nora_. I would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight,
Torvald.

_Helmer_. Nora--you surely don't mean that request you made of me this
morning?

_Nora_ (_going near him_). Yes, Torvald, I beg you so earnestly--

_Helmer_. Have you really the courage to open up that question again?

_Nora_. Yes, dear, you _must_ do as I ask; you _must_ let Krogstad keep
his post in the bank.

_Helmer_. My dear Nora, it is his post that I have arranged Mrs. Linde
shall have.

_Nora._ Yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just
as well dismiss some other clerk instead of Krogstad.

_Helmer._ This is simply incredible obstinacy! Because you chose to give
him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, I am expected
to--

_Nora._ That isn't the reason, Torvald. It is for your own sake. This
fellow writes in the most scurrilous newspapers; you have told me so
yourself. He can do you an unspeakable amount of harm. I am frightened
to death of him--

_Helmer._ Ah, I understand; it is recollections of the past that scare
you.

_Nora._ What do you mean?

_Helmer._ Naturally you are thinking of your father.

_Nora._ Yes--yes, of course. Just recall to your mind what these
malicious creatures wrote in the papers about papa, and how horribly
they slandered him. I believe they would have procured his dismissal if
the Department had not sent you over to inquire into it, and if you had
not been so kindly disposed and helpful to him.

_Helmer._ My little Nora, there is an important difference between your
father and me. Your father's reputation as a public official was not
above suspicion. Mine is, and I hope it will continue to be so, as long
as I hold my office.

_Nora._ You never can tell what mischief these men may contrive. We
ought to be so well off, so snug and happy here in our peaceful home,
and have no cares--you and I and the children, Torvald! That is why I
beg you so earnestly--

_Helmer_. And it is just by interceding for him that you make it
impossible for me to keep him. It is already known at the Bank that I
mean to dismiss Krogstad. Is it to get about now that the new manager
has changed his mind at his wife's bidding--

_Nora_. And what if it did?

_Helmer_. Of course!--if only this obstinate little person can get her
way! Do you suppose I am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole
staff, to let people think that I am a man to be swayed by all sorts of
outside influence? I should very soon feel the consequences of it, I can
tell you. And besides, there is one thing that makes it quite impossible
for me to have Krogstad in the bank as long as I am manager.

_Nora_. Whatever is that?

_Helmer_. His moral failings I might perhaps have overlooked, if
necessary--

_Nora_. Yes, you could--couldn't you?

_Helmer_. And, I hear he is a good worker, too. But I knew him when we
were boys. It was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an
incubus in after life. I may as well tell you plainly, we were once on
very intimate terms with one another. But this tactless fellow lays no
restraint upon himself when other people are present. On the contrary,
he thinks it gives him the right to adopt a familiar tone with me, and
every minute it is "I say, Helmer, old fellow!" and that sort of thing.
I assure you it is extremely painful to me. He would make my position in
the bank intolerable.

_Nora_. Torvald, I don't believe you mean that.

_Helmer_. Don't you? Why not?

_Nora_. Because it is such a narrow-minded way of looking at things.

_Helmer_. What are you saying? Narrow-minded? Do you think I am
narrow-minded?

_Nora_. No, just the opposite, dear--and it is exactly for that reason.

_Helmer_. It's the same thing. You say my point of view is
narrow-minded, so I must be so, too. Narrow-minded! Very well--I must
put an end to this. (_Goes to the hall door and calls.)_ Helen!

_Nora_. What are you going to do?

_Helmer_ (_looking among his papers)_. Settle it. (_Enter_ MAID.) Look
here; take this letter and go downstairs with it at once. Find a
messenger and tell him to deliver it, and be quick. The address is on
it, and here is the money.

_Maid_. Very well, sir. (_Exit with the letter_.)

_Helmer_ (_putting his papers together_). Now, then, little Miss
Obstinate.

_Nora_ (_breathlessly_). Torvald--what was that letter?

_Helmer_. Krogstad's dismissal.

_Nora_. Call her back, Torvald! There is still time. Oh Torvald, call
her back! Do it for my sake--for your own sake, for the children's sake!
Do you hear me, Torvald? Call her back! You don't know what that letter
can bring upon us.

_Helmer_. It's too late.

_Nora_. Yes, it's too late.

_Helmer_. My dear Nora, I can forgive the anxiety you are in, although
really it is an insult to me. It is, indeed. Isn't it an insult to think
that I should be afraid of a starving quill-driver's vengeance? But I
forgive you, nevertheless, because it is such eloquent witness to your
great love for me. (_Takes her in his arms.)_ And that is as it should
be, my own darling Nora. Come what will, you may be sure I shall have
both courage and strength if they be needed. You will see I am man
enough to take everything upon myself.

_Nora_ (_in a horror-stricken voice_). What do you mean by that?

_Helmer_. Everything I say--

_Nora_ (_recovering herself_). You will never have to do that.

_Helmer_. That's right. Well, we will share it, Nora, as man and wife
should. That is how it shall be. (_Caressing her_.) Are you content now?
There! There!--not these frightened dove's eyes! The whole thing is only
the wildest fancy!--Now, you must go and play through the Tarantella and
practice with your tambourine. I shall go into the inner office and shut
the door, and I shall hear nothing; you can make as much noise as you
please. (_Turns back at the door.)_ And when Rank comes, tell him where
he will find me. (_Nods to her, takes his papers and goes into his room,
and shuts the door after him_.)

_Nora_ (_bewildered with anxiety, stands as if rooted to the spot, and
whispers_). He was capable of doing it. He will do it. He will do it in
spite of everything.--No, not that! Never, never! Anything rather than
that! Oh, for some help, some way out of it. (_The door-bell rings_.)
Doctor Rank! Anything rather than that--anything, whatever it is! (_She
puts her hands over her face, pulls herself together, goes to the door
and opens it. _RANK_ is standing without, hanging up his coat. During
the following dialogue it begins to grow dark_.)

_Nora_. Good-day, Doctor Rank. I knew your ring. But you mustn't go into
Torvald now; I think he is busy with something.

_Rank_. And you?

_Nora_ (_brings him in and shuts the door after him_). Oh, you know very
well I always have time for you.

_Rank_. Thank you. I shall make use of as much of it as I can.

_Nora_. What do you mean by that? As much of it as you can.

_Rank_. Well, does that alarm you?

_Nora_. It was such a strange way of putting it. Is anything likely to
happen?

_Rank_. Nothing but what I have long been prepared for. But I certainly
didn't expect it to happen so soon.

_Nora_ (_gripping him by the arm_). What have you found out? Doctor
Rank, you must tell me.

_Rank_ (_sitting down by the stove_). It is all up with me. And it can't
be helped.

_Nora_ (_with a sigh of relief_). Is it about yourself?

_Rank_. Who else? It is no use lying to one's self. I am the most
wretched of all my patients, Mrs. Helmer. Lately I have been taking
stock of my internal economy. Bankrupt! Probably within a month I shall
lie rotting in the church-yard.

_Nora_. What an ugly thing to say!

_Rank_. The thing itself is cursedly ugly, and the worst of it is that I
shall have to face so much more that is ugly before that. I shall only
make one more examination of myself; when I have done that, I shall know
pretty certainly when it will be that the horrors of dissolution will
begin. There is something I want to tell you. Helmer's refined nature
gives him an unconquerable disgust of everything that is ugly; I won't
have him in my sick-room.

_Nora_. Oh, but, Doctor Rank--

_Rank_. I won't have him there. Not on any account. I bar my door to
him. As soon as I am quite certain that the worst has come, I shall send
you my card with a black cross on it, and then you will know that the
loathsome end has begun.

_Nora_. You are quite absurd to-day. And I wanted you so much to be in a
really good humour.

_Rank_. With death stalking beside me?--To have to pay this penalty for
another man's sin! Is there any justice in that? And in every single
family, in one way or another, some such inexorable retribution is being
exacted--

_Nora_ (_putting her hands over her ears_). Rubbish! Do talk of
something cheerful.

_Rank_. Oh, it's a mere laughing matter, the whole thing. My poor
innocent spine has to suffer for my father's youthful amusements.

_Nora_ (_sitting at the table on the left_). I suppose you mean that he
was too partial to asparagus and pate de foie gras, don't you?

_Rank_. Yes, and to truffles.

_Nora_. Truffles, yes. And oysters too, I suppose?

_Rank_. Oysters, of course, that goes without saying.

_Nora_. And heaps of port and champagne. It is sad that all these nice
things should take their revenge on our bones.

_Rank_. Especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky
bones of those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them.

_Nora_. Yes, that's the saddest part of it all.

_Rank_ (_with a searching look at her_). Hm!--

_Nora_ (_after a short pause_). Why did you smile?

_Rand_. No, it was you that laughed.

_Nora_. No, it was you that smiled, Doctor Rank!

_Rank_ (_rising_). You are a greater rascal than I thought.

_Nora_. I am in a silly mood today.

_Rank_. So it seems.

_Nora_ (_putting her hands on his shoulders_). Dear, dear Doctor Rank,
death mustn't take you away from Torvald and me.

_Rank_. It is a loss you would easily recover from. Those who are gone
are soon forgotten.

_Nora_ (_looking at him anxiously_). Do you believe that?

_Rank_. People form new ties, and then--

_Nora_. Who will form new ties?

_Rank_. Both you and Helmer, when I am gone. You yourself are already on
the high road to it, I think. What did that Mrs. Linde want here last
night?

_Nora_. Oho!--you don't mean to say you are jealous of poor Christine?

_Rank_. Yes, I am. She will be my successor in this house. When I am
done for, this woman will--

_Nora_. Hush! don't speak so loud. She is in that room.

_Rank_. To-day again. There, you see.

_Nora_. She has only come to sew my dress for me. Bless my soul, how
unreasonable you are! (_Sits down on the sofa_.) Be nice now, Doctor
Rank, and to-morrow you will see how beautifully I shall dance, and you
can imagine I am doing it all for you--and for Torvald too, of course.
(_Takes various things out of the box._) Doctor Rank, come and sit down
here, and I will show you something.

_Rank_ (_sitting down_). What is it?

_Nora_. Just look at those.

_Rank_. Silk stockings.

_Nora_. Flesh-coloured. Aren't they lovely? It is so dark here now, but
to-morrow--. No, no, no! you must only look at the feet. Oh, well, you
may have leave to look at the legs too.

_Rank_. Hm!--

_Nora_. Why are you looking so critical? Don't you think they will fit
me?

_Rank_. I have no means of forming an opinion about that.

_Nora_ (_looks at him for a moment_). For shame! (_Hits him lightly on
the ear with the stockings_.) That's to punish you. (_Folds them up
again_.)

_Rank_. And what other nice things am I to be allowed to see?

_Nora_. Not a single thing more, for being so naughty. (_She looks among
the things, humming to herself_.)

_Rank_ (_after a short silence_). When I am sitting here, talking to you
as intimately as this, I cannot imagine for a moment what would have
become of me if I had never come into this house.

_Nora_ (_smiling_). I believe you do feel thoroughly at home with us.

_Rank_ (_in a lower voice, looking straight in front of him_). And to be
obliged to leave it all--

_Nora_. Nonsense, you are not going to leave it.

_Rank_ (_as before_). And not be able to leave behind one the slightest
token of one's gratitude, scarcely even a fleeting regret--nothing but
an empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other.

_Nora_. And if I asked you now for a--? No!

_Rank_. For what?

_Nora_. For a big proof of your friendship--

_Rank_. Yes, yes.

_Nora_. I mean a tremendously big favour--

_Rank_. Would you really make me so happy for once?

_Nora_. Ah, but you don't know what it is yet.

_Rank_. No--but tell me.

_Nora_. I really can't, Doctor Rank. It is something out of all reason;
it means advice, and help, and a favour--

_Rank_. The bigger a thing it is the better. I can't conceive what it is
you mean. Do tell me. Haven't I your confidence?

_Nora_. More than anyone else. I know you are my truest and best friend,
and so I will tell you what it is. Well, Doctor Rank, it is something
you must help me to prevent. You know how devotedly, how inexpressibly
deeply Torvald loves me; he would never for a moment hesitate to give
his life for me.

_Rank_ (_leaning toward her_). Nora--do you think he is the only one--?

_Nora_ (_with a slight start_). The only one--?

_Rank_. The only one who would gladly give his life for your sake.

_Nora_ (_sadly_). Is that it?

_Rank_. I was determined you should know it before I went away, and
there will never be a better opportunity than this. Now you know it,
Nora. And now you know, too, that you can trust me as you would trust no
one else.

_Nora_ (_rises deliberately and quietly_). Let me pass.

_Rank_ (_makes room for her to pass him, but sits still_). Nora!

_Nora_ (_at the hall door_). Helen, bring in the lamp. (_Goes over to
the stove_.) Dear Doctor Rank, that was really horrid of you.

_Rank_. To have loved you as much as anyone else does? Was that horrid?

_Nora_. No, but to go and tell me so. There was really no need--

_Rank_. What do you mean? Did you know--? (MAID _enters with lamp, puts
it down on the table, and goes out_.) Nora--Mrs. Helmer--tell me, had
you any idea of this?

_Nora_. Oh, how do I know whether I had or whether I hadn't. I really
can't tell you--To think you could be so clumsy, Doctor Rank! We were
getting on so nicely.

_Bank_. Well, at all events you know now that you can command me, body
and soul. So won't you speak out?

_Nora_ (_looking at him_). After what happened?

_Rank_. I beg you to let me know what it is.

_Nora_. I can't tell you anything now.

_Rank_. Yes, yes. You mustn't punish me in that way. Let me have
permission to do for you whatever a man may do.

_Nora_. You can do nothing for me now. Besides, I really don't need any
help at all. You will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my
part. It really is so--of course it is! (_Sits down in the
rocking-chair, and looks at him with a smile_.) You are a nice sort of
man, Doctor Rank!--don't you feel ashamed of yourself, now the lamp has
come?

_Rank_. Not a bit. But perhaps I had better go--forever?

_Nora_. No, indeed, you shall not. Of course you must come here just as
before. You know very well Torvald can't do without you.

_Rank_. Yes, but you?

_Nora_. Oh, I am always tremendously pleased when you come.

_Rank_. It is just that, that put me on the wrong track. You are a
riddle to me. I have often thought that you would almost as soon be in
my company as in Helmer's.

_Nora_. Yes--you see there are some people one loves best, and others
whom one would almost always rather have as companions.

_Rank_. Yes, there is something in that.

_Nora_. When I was at home, of course I loved papa best. But I always
thought it tremendous fun if I could steal down into the maids' room,
because they never moralized at all, and talked to each other about such
entertaining things.

_Rank_. I see--it is their place I have taken.

_Nora_ (_jumping-up and going to him_). Oh, dear, nice Doctor Rank, I
never meant that at all. But surely you can understand that being with
Torvald is a little like being with papa--(_Enter_ MAID _from the hall_.)

_Maid_. If you please, ma'am. (_Whispers and hands her a card_.)

_Nora_ (_glancing at the card_). Oh! (_Puts it in her pocket_.)

_Rank_. Is there anything wrong?

_Nora_. No, no, not in the least. It is only something--It is my new
dress--

_Rank_. What? Your dress is lying there.

_Nora_. Oh, yes, that one; but this is another. I ordered it. Torvald
mustn't know about it--

_Rank_. Oho! Then that was the great secret.

_Nora_. Of course. Just go in to him; he is sitting in the inner room.
Keep him as long as--

_Rank_. Make your mind easy; I won't let him escape. (_Goes into_
HELMER'S _room_.)

_Nora_ (_to the_ MAID). And he is standing waiting in the kitchen?

_Maid_. Yes; he came up the back stairs.

_Nora_. But didn't you tell him no one was in?

_Maid_. Yes, but it was no good.

_Nora_. He won't go away?

_Maid_. No; he says he won't until he has seen you, ma'am.

_Nora_. Well, let him come in--but quietly. Helen, you mustn't say
anything about it to any one. It is a surprise for my husband.

_Maid_. Yes, ma'am, I quite understand. (_Exit_.)

_Nora_. This dreadful thing is going to happen. It will happen in spite
of me! No, no, no, it can't happen--it shan't happen! (_She bolts the
door of_ HELMER'S _room. The_ MAID _opens the hall door for_ KROGSTAD
_and shuts it after him. He is wearing a fur coat, high boots and a fur
cap_.)

_Nora_ (_advancing towards him_). Speak low--my husband is at home.

_Krogstad_. No matter about that.

_Nora_. What do you want of me?

_Krogstad_. An explanation of something.

_Nora_. Make haste then. What is it?

_Krogstad_. You know, I suppose, that I have got my dismissal.

_Nora_. I couldn't prevent it, Mr. Krogstad. I fought as hard as I could
on your side, but it was no good.

_Krogstad_. Does your husband love you so little, then? He knows what I
can expose you to, and yet he ventures--

_Nora_. How can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?

_Krogstad_. I didn't suppose so at all. It would not be the least like
our dear Torvald Helmer to show so much courage--

_Nora_. Mr. Krogstad, a little respect for my husband, please.

_Krogstad_. Certainly--all the respect he deserves. But since you have
kept the matter so carefully to yourself, I make bold to suppose that
you have a little clearer idea than you had yesterday, of what it
actually is that you have done?

_Nora_. More than you could ever teach me.

_Krogstad_. Yes, such a bad lawyer as I am.

_Nora_. What is it you want of me?

_Krogstad_. Only to see how you were, Mrs. Helmer. I have been thinking
about you all day long. A mere cashier--a quill-driver, a--well, a man
like me--even he has a little of what is called feeling, you know.

_Nora_. Show it, then; think of my little children.

_Krogstad_. Have you and your husband thought of mine? But never mind
about that. I only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter
too seriously. In the first place there will be no accusation made on my
part.

_Nora_. No, of course not; I was sure of that.

_Krogstad_. The whole thing can be arranged amicably; there is no reason
why anyone should know anything about it. It will remain a secret
between us three.

_Nora_. My husband must never get to know anything about it.

_Krogstad_. How will you be able to prevent it? Am I to understand that
you can pay the balance that is owing?

_Nora_. No, not just at present.

_Krogstad_. Or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the
money soon?

_Nora_. No expedient that I mean to make use of.

_Krogstad_. Well, in any case, it would have been of no use to you now.
If you stood there with ever so much money in your hand, I would never
part with your bond.

_Nora_. Tell me what purpose you mean to put it to.

_Krogstad_. I shall only preserve it--keep it in my possession. No one
who is not concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it.
So that if the thought of it has driven you to any desperate
resolution--

_Nora_. It has.

_Krogstad_. If you had it in your mind to run away from your home--

_Nora_. I had.

_Krogstad_. Or even something worse--

_Nora_. How could you know that?

_Krogstad_. Give up the idea.

_Nora_. How did you know I had thought of _that?_

_Krogstad_. Most of us think of that at first. I did, too--but I hadn't
the courage.

_Nora_ (_faintly_). No more had I.

_Krogstad_ (_in a tone of relief)_. No, that's it, isn't it--you hadn't
the courage either?

_Nora_. No, I haven't--I haven't.

_Krogstad_. Besides, it would have been a great piece of folly. Once the
first storm at home is over--. I have a letter for your husband in my
pocket.

_Nora_. Telling him everything?

_Krogstad_. In as lenient a manner as I possibly could.

_Nora_ (_quickly)_. He mustn't get the letter. Tear it up. I will find
some means of getting money.

_Krogstad_. Excuse me, Mrs. Helmer, but I think I told you just how--

_Nora_. I am not speaking of what I owe you. Tell me what sum you are
asking my husband for, and I will get the money.

_Krogstad_. I am not asking your husband for a penny.

_Nora_. What do you want, then?

_Krogstad_. I will tell you. I want to rehabilitate myself, Mrs. Helmer;
I want to get on; and in that your husband must help me. For the last
year and a half I have not had a hand in anything dishonourable, and all
that time I have been struggling in most restricted circumstances. I was
content to work my way up step by step. Now I am turned out, and I am
not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again. I
want to get on, I tell you. I want to get into the Bank again, in a
higher position. Your husband must make a place for me--

_Nora_. That he will never do!

_Krogstad_. He will; I know him; he dare not protest. And as soon as I
am in there again with him, then you will see! Within a year I shall be
the manager's right hand. It will be Nils Krogstad and not Torvald
Helmer who manages the Bank.

_Nora_. That's a thing you will never see!

_Krogstad_. Do you mean that you will--?

_Nora_. I have courage enough for it now.

_Krogstad_. Oh, you can't frighten me. A fine, spoilt lady like you--

_Nora_. You will see, you will see.

_Krogstad_. Under the ice, perhaps? Down into the cold, coal-black
water? And then, in the spring, to float up to the surface, all horrible
and unrecognizable, with your hair fallen out--

_Nora_. You can't frighten me.

_Krogstad_. Nor you me. People don't do such things, Mrs. Helmer.
Besides, what use would it be? I should have him completely in my power
all the same.

_Nora_. Afterwards? When I am no longer--

_Krogstad_. Have you forgot that it is I who have the keeping of your
reputation? (_Nora stands speechlessly looking at him.)_ Well, now, I
have warned you. Do not do anything foolish. When Helmer has had my
letter, I shall expect a message from him. And be sure you remember that
it is your husband himself who has forced me into such ways as this
again. I will never forgive him for that. Good-bye, Mrs. Helmer. (_Exit
through the hall.)_

_Nora_ (_goes to the hall door, opens it slightly and listens_). He is
going. He is not putting the letter in the box. Oh, no, no, that's
impossible! (_Opens the door by degrees._) What is that? He is standing
outside. He is not going downstairs. Is he hesitating? Can he--? (_A
letter drops into the box; then_ KROGSTAD'S _footsteps are heard, till
they die away as he goes downstairs._ NORA _utters a stifled cry, and
runs across the room to the table by the sofa. A short pause_.)

_Nora_. In the letter-box. (_Steals across to the hall-door_.) There it
lies--Torvald, Torvald, there is no hope for us now!

(MRS. LINDE _comes in from the room on the left, carrying the dress_.)

_Mrs. Linde_. There, I can't see anything more to mend now. Would you
like to try it on--?

_Nora_ (_in a hoarse whisper_). Christine, come here.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_throwing the dress down on the sofa_). What is the matter
with you? You look so agitated!

_Nora_. Come here. Do you see that letter? There, look--you can see it
through the glass in the letter-box.

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, I see it.

_Nora_. That letter is from Krogstad.

_Mrs. Linde_. Nora--it was Krogstad who lent you the money!

_Nora_. Yes, and now Torvald will know all about it.

_Mrs. Linde_. Believe me, Nora, that's the best thing for both of you.

_Nora_. You don't know all. I forged a name.

_Mrs. Linde_. Good heavens--!

_Nora_. I only want to say this to you, Christine--you must be my witness.

_Mrs. Linde_. Your witness! What do you mean? What am I to--?

_Nora_. If I should go out of my mind--and it might easily happen--

_Mrs. Linde_. Nora!

_Nora_. Or if anything else should happen to me--anything, for instance,
that might prevent my being here--

_Mrs. Linde_. Nora! Nora! you are quite out of your mind.

_Nora_. And if it should happen that there were someone who wanted to
take all the responsibility, all the blame, you understand--

_Mrs. Linde_. Yes, yes--but how can you suppose--?

_Nora_. Then you must be my witness, that it is not true, Christine. I
am not out of my mind at all; I am in my right senses now, and I tell
you no one else has known anything about it; I and I alone, did the
whole thing. Remember that.

_Mrs. Linde_. I will, indeed. But I don't understand all this.

_Nora_. How should you understand it? A wonderful thing is going to
happen.

_Mrs. Linde_. A wonderful thing?

_Nora_. Yes, a wonderful thing!--But it is so terrible, Christine; it
_mustn't_ happen, not for all the world.

_Mrs. Linde_. I will go at once and see Krogstad.

_Nora_. Don't go to him; he will do you some harm.

_Mrs. Linde_. There was a time when he would gladly do anything for my
sake.

_Nora_. He?

_Mrs. Linde_. Where does he live?

_Nora_. How should I know--? Yes (_feeling in her pocket_) here is his
card. But the letter, the letter--!

_Helmer_ (_calls from his room, knocking at the door_). Nora.

_Nora_ (_cries out anxiously_). Oh, what's that? What do you want?

_Helmer_. Don't be so frightened. We are not coming in; you have locked
the door. Are you trying on your dress?

_Nora_. Yes, that's it. I look so nice, Torvald.

_Mrs. Linde_ (_who has read the card_) I see he lives at the corner
here.

_Nora_. Yes, but it's no use. It is hopeless. The letter is lying there
in the box.

_Mrs. Linde_. And your husband keeps the key?

_Nora_. Yes, always.

_Mrs. Linde_. Krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find
some pretence--

_Nora_. But it is just at this time that Torvald generally--

_Mrs. Linde_. You must delay him. Go in to him in the meantime. I will
come back as soon as I can. (_She goes out hurriedly through the hall
door_.)

_Nora_ (_goes to_ HELMER'S _door, opens it and peeps in_). Torvald!

_Helmer_ (_from the inner room_). Well? May I venture at last to come
into my own room again? Come along, Rank, now you will see--(_ Halting
in the doorway_.) But what is this?

_Nora_. What is what, dear?

_Helmer_. Rank led me to expect a splendid transformation.

_Rank_ (_in the doorway_). I understood so, but evidently I was
mistaken.

_Nora_. Yes, nobody is to have the chance of admiring me in my dress
until to-morrow.

_Helmer_. But, my dear Nora, you look so worn out. Have you been
practising too much?

_Nora_. No, I have not practised at all.

_Helmer_. But you will need to--

_Nora_. Yes, indeed I shall, Torvald. But I can't get on a bit without
you to help me; I have absolutely forgotten the whole thing.

_Helmer_. Oh, we will soon work it up again.

_Nora_. Yes, help me, Torvald. Promise that you will! I am so nervous
about it--all the people--. You must give yourself up to me entirely
this evening. Not the tiniest bit of business--you mustn't even take a
pen in your hand. Will you promise, Torvald dear?

_Helmer_. I promise. This evening I will be wholly and absolutely at
your service, you helpless little mortal. Ah, by the way, first of all I
will just--(_Goes toward the hall-door_.)

_Nora_. What are you going to do there?

_Helmer_. Only see if any letters have come.

_Nora_. No, no! don't do that, Torvald!

_Helmer_. Why not?

_Nora_. Torvald, please don't. There is nothing there.

_Helmer_. Well, let me look. (_Turns to go to the letter-box._ NORA, _at
the piano, plays the first bars of the Tarantella_. HELMER _stops in the
doorway_.) Aha!

_Nora_. I can't dance to-morrow if I don't practise with you.

_Helmer_ (_going up to her_). Are you really so afraid of it, dear?

_Nora_. Yes, so dreadfully afraid of it. Let me practise at once; there
is time now, before we go to dinner. Sit down and play for me, Torvald
dear; criticise me, and correct me as you play.

_Helmer_. With great pleasure, if you wish me to. (_Sits down at the
piano_.)

_Nora_ (_takes out of the box a tambourine and a long variegated shawl.
She hastily drapes the shawl round her. Then she springs to the front of
the stage and calls out_). Now play for me! I am going to dance!

(HELMER _plays and_ NORA _dances_. RANK _stands by the piano behind_
HELMER, _and looks on_.)

_Helmer_ (_as he plays_). Slower, slower!

_Nora_. I can't do it any other way.

_Helmer_. Not so violently, Nora!

_Nora_. This is the way.

_Helmer_ (_stops playing_). No, no--that is not a bit right.

_Nora_ (_laughing and swinging the tambourine_). Didn't I tell you so?

_Rank_. Let me play for her.

_Helmer_ (_getting up_). Yes, do. I can correct her better then.

(RANK _sits down at the piano and plays. Nora dances more and more
wildly_. HELMER _has taken up a position beside the stove, and during
her dance gives her frequent instructions. She does not seem to hear
him; her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders; she pays no
attention to it, but goes on dancing. Enter_ MRS. LINDE.)

_Mrs. Linde_ (_standing as if spell-bound in the doorway_). Oh!--

_Nora_ (_as she dances_). Such fun, Christine!

_Helmer_. My dear darling Nora, you are dancing as if your life depended
on it.

_Nora_. So it does.

_Helmer_. Stop, Rank; this is sheer madness. Stop, I tell you. (RANK
_stops playing, and,_ NORA _suddenly stands still_. HELMER _goes up to
her._) I could never have believed it. You have forgotten everything I
taught you.

_Nora_ (_throwing away the tambourine_). There, you see.

_Helmer_. You will want a lot of coaching.

_Nora_. Yes, you see how much I need it. You must coach me up to the
last minute. Promise me that, Torvald!

_Helmer_. You can depend on me.

_Nora_. You must not think of anything but me, either to-day or
to-morrow; you mustn't open a single letter--not even open the
letter-box--

_Helmer_. Ah, you are still afraid of that fellow----

_Nora_. Yes, indeed I am.

_Helmer_. Nora, I can tell from your looks that there is a letter from
him lying there.

_Nora_. I don't know; I think there is; but you must not read anything
of that kind now. Nothing horrid must come between us till this is all
over.

_Rank_ (_whispers to_ HELMER). You mustn't contradict her.

_Helmer_ (_taking her in his arms_). The child shall have her way. But
to-morrow night, after you have danced--

_Nora_. Then you will be free. (_The_ MAID _appears in the doorway to
the right_.)

_Maid_. Dinner is served, ma'am.

_Nora_. We will have champagne, Helen.

_Maid_. Very good, ma'am.

_Helmer_. Hullo!--are we going to have a banquet? (_Exit._)

_Nora_. Yes, a champagne banquet till the small hours. (_Calls out_.)
And a few macaroons, Helen--lots, just for once!

_Helmer_. Come, come, don't be so wild and nervous. Be my own little
skylark, as you used.

_Nora_. Yes, dear, I will. But go in now and you too, Doctor Rank.
Christine, you must, help me to do up my hair.

_Rank_ (_whispers to_ HELMER _as they go out_). I suppose there is
nothing--she is not expecting anything?

_Helmer_. Far from it, my dear fellow; it is simply nothing more than
this childish nervousness I was telling you of. (_They go into the
right-hand room_.)

_Nora_. Well!

_Mrs. Linde_. Gone out of town.

_Nora_. I could tell from your face.

_Mrs. Linde_. He is coming home tomorrow evening. I wrote a note for
him.

_Nora_. You should have let it alone; you must prevent nothing. After
all, it is splendid to be waiting for a wonderful thing to happen.

_Mrs. Linde_. What is it that you are waiting for?

_Nora_, Oh, you wouldn't understand. Go in to them. I will come in a
moment. (MRS. LINDE _goes into the dining-room._ NORA _stands still for
a little while, as if to compose herself. Then she looks at her watch_.)
Five o'clock. Seven hours till midnight; and then four-and-twenty hours
till the next midnight. Then the Tarantella will be over. Twenty-four
and seven? Thirty-one hours to live.

_Helmer_ (_from the doorway on the right_). Where's my little skylark?

_Nora_ (_going to him with her arms out-stretched_). Here she is!





