Arthur Clennam stood in the street, waiting to ask some passer-by what
place that was. He suffered a few people to pass him in whose face there
was no encouragement to make the inquiry, and still stood pausing in the
street, when an old man came up and turned into the courtyard.

He stooped a good deal, and plodded along in a slow pre-occupied manner,
   which made the bustling London thoroughfares no very safe resort for
   him. He was dirtily and meanly dressed, in a threadbare coat, once blue,
   reaching to his ankles and buttoned to his chin, where it vanished in
   the pale ghost of a velvet collar. A piece of red cloth with which that
   phantom had been stiffened in its lifetime was now laid bare, and poked
   itself up, at the back of the old man's neck, into a confusion of grey
   hair and rusty stock and buckle which altogether nearly poked his
   hat off. A greasy hat it was, and a napless; impending over his eyes,
   cracked and crumpled at the brim, and with a wisp of pocket-handkerchief
   dangling out below it. His trousers were so long and loose, and his
   shoes so clumsy and large, that he shuffled like an elephant; though how
   much of this was gait, and how much trailing cloth and leather, no one
   could have told. Under one arm he carried a limp and worn-out case,
   containing some wind instrument; in the same hand he had a pennyworth
   of snuff in a little packet of whitey-brown paper, from which he slowly
   comforted his poor blue old nose with a lengthened-out pinch, as Arthur
   Clennam looked at him.

   To this old man crossing the court-yard, he preferred his inquiry,
   touching him on the shoulder. The old man stopped and looked round, with
   the expression in his weak grey eyes of one whose thoughts had been far
   off, and who was a little dull of hearing also.

   'Pray, sir,' said Arthur, repeating his question, 'what is this place?'

   'Ay! This place?' returned the old man, staying his pinch of snuff on
   its road, and pointing at the place without looking at it. 'This is the
   Marshalsea, sir.'

   'The debtors' prison?'

   'Sir,' said the old man, with the air of deeming it not quite necessary
   to insist upon that designation, 'the debtors' prison.'

   He turned himself about, and went on.

   'I beg your pardon,' said Arthur, stopping him once more, 'but will you
   allow me to ask you another question? Can any one go in here?'

   'Any one can _go in_,' replied the old man; plainly adding by the
   significance of his emphasis, 'but it is not every one who can go out.'

   'Pardon me once more. Are you familiar with the place?'

   'Sir,' returned the old man, squeezing his little packet of snuff in his
   hand, and turning upon his interrogator as if such questions hurt him.
   'I am.'

   'I beg you to excuse me. I am not impertinently curious, but have a good
   object. Do you know the name of Dorrit here?'

   'My name, sir,' replied the old man most unexpectedly, 'is Dorrit.'

   Arthur pulled off his hat to him. 'Grant me the favour of half-a-dozen
   words. I was wholly unprepared for your announcement, and hope that
   assurance is my sufficient apology for having taken the liberty of
   addressing you. I have recently come home to England after a long
   absence. I have seen at my mother's--Mrs Clennam in the city--a young
   woman working at her needle, whom I have only heard addressed or spoken
   of as Little Dorrit. I have felt sincerely interested in her, and have
   had a great desire to know something more about her. I saw her, not a
   minute before you came up, pass in at that door.'

   The old man looked at him attentively. 'Are you a sailor, sir?' he
   asked. He seemed a little disappointed by the shake of the head that
   replied to him. 'Not a sailor? I judged from your sunburnt face that you
   might be. Are you in earnest, sir?'

   'I do assure you that I am, and do entreat you to believe that I am, in
   plain earnest.'

   'I know very little of the world, sir,' returned the other, who had a
   weak and quavering voice. 'I am merely passing on, like the shadow over
   the sun-dial. It would be worth no man's while to mislead me; it would
   really be too easy--too poor a success, to yield any satisfaction. The
   young woman whom you saw go in here is my brother's child. My brother
   is William Dorrit; I am Frederick. You say you have seen her at your
   mother's (I know your mother befriends her), you have felt an interest
   in her, and you wish to know what she does here. Come and see.'

   He went on again, and Arthur accompanied him.

   'My brother,' said the old man, pausing on the step and slowly facing
   round again, 'has been here many years; and much that happens even among
   ourselves, out of doors, is kept from him for reasons that I needn't
   enter upon now. Be so good as to say nothing of my niece's working at
   her needle. Be so good as to say nothing that goes beyond what is said
   among us. If you keep within our bounds, you cannot well be wrong. Now!
   Come and see.'

   Arthur followed him down a narrow entry, at the end of which a key was
   turned, and a strong door was opened from within. It admitted them into
   a lodge or lobby, across which they passed, and so through another door
   and a grating into the prison. The old man always plodding on before,
   turned round, in his slow, stiff, stooping manner, when they came to the
   turnkey on duty, as if to present his companion. The turnkey nodded; and
   the companion passed in without being asked whom he wanted.

   The night was dark; and the prison lamps in the yard, and the candles in
   the prison windows faintly shining behind many sorts of wry old curtain
   and blind, had not the air of making it lighter. A few people loitered
   about, but the greater part of the population was within doors. The old
   man, taking the right-hand side of the yard, turned in at the third or
   fourth doorway, and began to ascend the stairs. 'They are rather dark,
   sir, but you will not find anything in the way.'

   He paused for a moment before opening a door on the second story. He had
   no sooner turned the handle than the visitor saw Little Dorrit, and saw
   the reason of her setting so much store by dining alone.

   She had brought the meat home that she should have eaten herself, and
   was already warming it on a gridiron over the fire for her father, clad
   in an old grey gown and a black cap, awaiting his supper at the table.
   A clean cloth was spread before him, with knife, fork, and spoon,
   salt-cellar, pepper-box, glass, and pewter ale-pot. Such zests as his
   particular little phial of cayenne pepper and his pennyworth of pickles
   in a saucer, were not wanting.

   She started, coloured deeply, and turned white. The visitor, more with
   his eyes than by the slight impulsive motion of his hand, entreated her
   to be reassured and to trust him.

   'I found this gentleman,' said the uncle--'Mr Clennam, William, son of
   Amy's friend--at the outer gate, wishful, as he was going by, of paying
   his respects, but hesitating whether to come in or not. This is my
   brother William, sir.'

   'I hope,' said Arthur, very doubtful what to say, 'that my respect for
   your daughter may explain and justify my desire to be presented to you,
   sir.'

   'Mr Clennam,' returned the other, rising, taking his cap off in the
   flat of his hand, and so holding it, ready to put on again, 'you do me
   honour. You are welcome, sir;' with a low bow. 'Frederick, a chair. Pray
   sit down, Mr Clennam.'

   He put his black cap on again as he had taken it off, and resumed his
   own seat. There was a wonderful air of benignity and patronage in his
   manner. These were the ceremonies with which he received the collegians.

   'You are welcome to the Marshalsea, sir. I have welcomed many gentlemen
   to these walls. Perhaps you are aware--my daughter Amy may have
   mentioned that I am the Father of this place.'

   'I--so I have understood,' said Arthur, dashing at the assertion.

   'You know, I dare say, that my daughter Amy was born here. A good girl,
   sir, a dear girl, and long a comfort and support to me. Amy, my dear,
   put this dish on; Mr Clennam will excuse the primitive customs to which
   we are reduced here. Is it a compliment to ask you if you would do me
   the honour, sir, to--'

   'Thank you,' returned Arthur. 'Not a morsel.'

   He felt himself quite lost in wonder at the manner of the man, and that
   the probability of his daughter's having had a reserve as to her family
   history, should be so far out of his mind.

   She filled his glass, put all the little matters on the table ready to
   his hand, and then sat beside him while he ate his supper. Evidently in
   observance of their nightly custom, she put some bread before herself,
   and touched his glass with her lips; but Arthur saw she was troubled
   and took nothing. Her look at her father, half admiring him and proud
   of him, half ashamed for him, all devoted and loving, went to his inmost
   heart.

   The Father of the Marshalsea condescended towards his brother as an
   amiable, well-meaning man; a private character, who had not arrived at
   distinction. 'Frederick,' said he, 'you and Fanny sup at your lodgings
   to-night, I know. What have you done with Fanny, Frederick?'

   'She is walking with Tip.'

   'Tip--as you may know--is my son, Mr Clennam. He has been a little
   wild, and difficult to settle, but his introduction to the world was
   rather'--he shrugged his shoulders with a faint sigh, and looked round
   the room--'a little adverse. Your first visit here, sir?'

   'My first.'

   'You could hardly have been here since your boyhood without my
   knowledge. It very seldom happens that anybody--of any pretensions--any
   pretensions--comes here without being presented to me.'

   'As many as forty or fifty in a day have been introduced to my brother,'
   said Frederick, faintly lighting up with a ray of pride.

   'Yes!' the Father of the Marshalsea assented. 'We have even exceeded
   that number. On a fine Sunday in term time, it is quite a Levee--quite
   a Levee. Amy, my dear, I have been trying half the day to remember the
   name of the gentleman from Camberwell who was introduced to me last
   Christmas week by that agreeable coal-merchant who was remanded for six
   months.'

   'I don't remember his name, father.'

   'Frederick, do _you_ remember his name?'

   Frederick doubted if he had ever heard it. No one could doubt that
   Frederick was the last person upon earth to put such a question to, with
   any hope of information.

   'I mean,' said his brother, 'the gentleman who did that handsome action
   with so much delicacy. Ha! Tush! The name has quite escaped me. Mr
   Clennam, as I have happened to mention handsome and delicate action, you
   may like, perhaps, to know what it was.'

   'Very much,' said Arthur, withdrawing his eyes from the delicate head
   beginning to droop and the pale face with a new solicitude stealing over
   it.

   'It is so generous, and shows so much fine feeling, that it is almost a
   duty to mention it. I said at the time that I always would mention it
   on every suitable occasion, without regard to personal sensitiveness.
   A--well--a--it's of no use to disguise the fact--you must know, Mr
   Clennam, that it does sometimes occur that people who come here desire
   to offer some little--Testimonial--to the Father of the place.'

   To see her hand upon his arm in mute entreaty half-repressed, and her
   timid little shrinking figure turning away, was to see a sad, sad sight.

   'Sometimes,' he went on in a low, soft voice, agitated, and clearing
   his throat every now and then; 'sometimes--hem--it takes one shape and
   sometimes another; but it is generally--ha--Money. And it is, I cannot
   but confess it, it is too often--hem--acceptable. This gentleman that I
   refer to, was presented to me, Mr Clennam, in a manner highly gratifying
   to my feelings, and conversed not only with great politeness, but with
   great--ahem--information.' All this time, though he had finished his
   supper, he was nervously going about his plate with his knife and
   fork, as if some of it were still before him. 'It appeared from his
   conversation that he had a garden, though he was delicate of mentioning
   it at first, as gardens are--hem--are not accessible to me. But it came
   out, through my admiring a very fine cluster of geranium--beautiful
   cluster of geranium to be sure--which he had brought from his
   conservatory. On my taking notice of its rich colour, he showed me a
   piece of paper round it, on which was written, "For the Father of the
   Marshalsea," and presented it to me. But this was--hem--not all. He made
   a particular request, on taking leave, that I would remove the paper in
   half an hour. I--ha--I did so; and I found that it contained--ahem--two
   guineas. I assure you, Mr Clennam, I have received--hem--Testimonials
   in many ways, and of many degrees of value, and they have always
   been--ha--unfortunately acceptable; but I never was more pleased than
   with this--ahem--this particular Testimonial.'

   Arthur was in the act of saying the little he could say on such a theme,
   when a bell began to ring, and footsteps approached the door. A pretty
   girl of a far better figure and much more developed than Little Dorrit,
   though looking much younger in the face when the two were observed
   together, stopped in the doorway on seeing a stranger; and a young man
   who was with her, stopped too.

   'Mr Clennam, Fanny. My eldest daughter and my son, Mr Clennam. The bell
   is a signal for visitors to retire, and so they have come to say good
   night; but there is plenty of time, plenty of time. Girls, Mr Clennam
   will excuse any household business you may have together. He knows, I
   dare say, that I have but one room here.'

   'I only want my clean dress from Amy, father,' said the second girl.

   'And I my clothes,' said Tip.

   Amy opened a drawer in an old piece of furniture that was a chest of
   drawers above and a bedstead below, and produced two little bundles,
   which she handed to her brother and sister. 'Mended and made up?'
   Clennam heard the sister ask in a whisper. To which Amy answered 'Yes.'
   He had risen now, and took the opportunity of glancing round the room.
   The bare walls had been coloured green, evidently by an unskilled hand,
   and were poorly decorated with a few prints. The window was curtained,
   and the floor carpeted; and there were shelves and pegs, and other such
   conveniences, that had accumulated in the course of years. It was a
   close, confined room, poorly furnished; and the chimney smoked to boot,
   or the tin screen at the top of the fireplace was superfluous; but
   constant pains and care had made it neat, and even, after its kind,
   comfortable.

   All the while the bell was ringing, and the uncle was anxious to go.
   'Come, Fanny, come, Fanny,' he said, with his ragged clarionet case
   under his arm; 'the lock, child, the lock!'

   Fanny bade her father good night, and whisked off airily. Tip had
   already clattered down-stairs. 'Now, Mr Clennam,' said the uncle,
   looking back as he shuffled out after them, 'the lock, sir, the lock.'

   Mr Clennam had two things to do before he followed; one, to offer his
   testimonial to the Father of the Marshalsea, without giving pain to his
   child; the other to say something to that child, though it were but a
   word, in explanation of his having come there.

   'Allow me,' said the Father, 'to see you down-stairs.'

   She had slipped out after the rest, and they were alone. 'Not on any
   account,' said the visitor, hurriedly. 'Pray allow me to--' chink,
   chink, chink.

   'Mr Clennam,' said the Father, 'I am deeply, deeply--' But his visitor
   had shut up his hand to stop the clinking, and had gone down-stairs with
   great speed.

   He saw no Little Dorrit on his way down, or in the yard. The last two or
   three stragglers were hurrying to the lodge, and he was following,
   when he caught sight of her in the doorway of the first house from the
   entrance. He turned back hastily.

   'Pray forgive me,' he said, 'for speaking to you here; pray forgive me
   for coming here at all! I followed you to-night. I did so, that I might
   endeavour to render you and your family some service. You know the
   terms on which I and my mother are, and may not be surprised that I
   have preserved our distant relations at her house, lest I should
   unintentionally make her jealous, or resentful, or do you any injury in
   her estimation. What I have seen here, in this short time, has greatly
   increased my heartfelt wish to be a friend to you. It would recompense
   me for much disappointment if I could hope to gain your confidence.'

   She was scared at first, but seemed to take courage while he spoke to
   her.

   'You are very good, sir. You speak very earnestly to me. But I--but I
   wish you had not watched me.'

   He understood the emotion with which she said it, to arise in her
   father's behalf; and he respected it, and was silent.

   'Mrs Clennam has been of great service to me; I don't know what we
   should have done without the employment she has given me; I am afraid
   it may not be a good return to become secret with her; I can say no more
   to-night, sir. I am sure you mean to be kind to us. Thank you, thank
   you.'

   'Let me ask you one question before I leave. Have you known my mother
   long?'

   'I think two years, sir,--The bell has stopped.'

   'How did you know her first? Did she send here for you?'

   'No. She does not even know that I live here. We have a friend, father
   and I--a poor labouring man, but the best of friends--and I wrote out
   that I wished to do needlework, and gave his address. And he got what
   I wrote out displayed at a few places where it cost nothing, and Mrs
   Clennam found me that way, and sent for me. The gate will be locked,
   sir!'

   She was so tremulous and agitated, and he was so moved by compassion for
   her, and by deep interest in her story as it dawned upon him, that he
   could scarcely tear himself away. But the stoppage of the bell, and the
   quiet in the prison, were a warning to depart; and with a few hurried
   words of kindness he left her gliding back to her father.

   But he remained too late. The inner gate was locked, and the lodge
   closed. After a little fruitless knocking with his hand, he was standing
   there with the disagreeable conviction upon him that he had got to get
   through the night, when a voice accosted him from behind.

   'Caught, eh?' said the voice. 'You won't go home till morning. Oh! It's
   you, is it, Mr Clennam?'

   The voice was Tip's; and they stood looking at one another in the
   prison-yard, as it began to rain.

   'You've done it,' observed Tip; 'you must be sharper than that next
   time.'

   'But you are locked in too,' said Arthur.

   'I believe I am!' said Tip, sarcastically. 'About! But not in your way.
   I belong to the shop, only my sister has a theory that our governor must
   never know it. I don't see why, myself.'

   'Can I get any shelter?' asked Arthur. 'What had I better do?'

   'We had better get hold of Amy first of all,' said Tip, referring any
   difficulty to her as a matter of course.

   'I would rather walk about all night--it's not much to do--than give
   that trouble.'

   'You needn't do that, if you don't mind paying for a bed. If you don't
   mind paying, they'll make you up one on the Snuggery table, under the
   circumstances. If you'll come along, I'll introduce you there.'

   As they passed down the yard, Arthur looked up at the window of the room
   he had lately left, where the light was still burning. 'Yes, sir,' said
   Tip, following his glance. 'That's the governor's. She'll sit with him
   for another hour reading yesterday's paper to him, or something of that
   sort; and then she'll come out like a little ghost, and vanish away
   without a sound.'

   'I don't understand you.'

   'The governor sleeps up in the room, and she has a lodging at the
   turnkey's. First house there,' said Tip, pointing out the doorway into
   which she had retired. 'First house, sky parlour. She pays twice as much
   for it as she would for one twice as good outside. But she stands by the
   governor, poor dear girl, day and night.'

   This brought them to the tavern-establishment at the upper end of the
   prison, where the collegians had just vacated their social evening club.
   The apartment on the ground-floor in which it was held, was the Snuggery
   in question; the presidential tribune of the chairman, the pewter-pots,
   glasses, pipes, tobacco-ashes, and general flavour of members, were
   still as that convivial institution had left them on its adjournment.
   The Snuggery had two of the qualities popularly held to be essential to
   grog for ladies, in respect that it was hot and strong; but in the third
   point of analogy, requiring plenty of it, the Snuggery was defective;
   being but a cooped-up apartment.

   The unaccustomed visitor from outside, naturally assumed everybody here
   to be prisoners--landlord, waiter, barmaid, potboy, and all. Whether
   they were or not, did not appear; but they all had a weedy look. The
   keeper of a chandler's shop in a front parlour, who took in gentlemen
   boarders, lent his assistance in making the bed. He had been a tailor in
   his time, and had kept a phaeton, he said. He boasted that he stood up
   litigiously for the interests of the college; and he had undefined and
   undefinable ideas that the marshal intercepted a 'Fund,' which ought to
   come to the collegians. He liked to believe this, and always impressed
   the shadowy grievance on new-comers and strangers; though he could not,
   for his life, have explained what Fund he meant, or how the notion had
   got rooted in his soul. He had fully convinced himself, notwithstanding,
   that his own proper share of the Fund was three and ninepence a week;
and that in this amount he, as an individual collegian, was swindled by
the marshal, regularly every Monday. Apparently, he helped to make the
bed, that he might not lose an opportunity of stating this case; after
which unloading of his mind, and after announcing (as it seemed he
        always did, without anything coming of it) that he was going to write a
letter to the papers and show the marshal up, he fell into miscellaneous
conversation with the rest. It was evident from the general tone of the
whole party, that they had come to regard insolvency as the normal state
of mankind, and the payment of debts as a disease that occasionally
broke out.

In this strange scene, and with these strange spectres flitting about
him, Arthur Clennam looked on at the preparations as if they were part
of a dream. Pending which, the long-initiated Tip, with an awful
enjoyment of the Snuggery's resources, pointed out the common kitchen
fire maintained by subscription of collegians, the boiler for hot water
supported in like manner, and other premises generally tending to the
deduction that the way to be healthy, wealthy, and wise, was to come to
the Marshalsea.

The two tables put together in a corner, were, at length, converted into
a very fair bed; and the stranger was left to the Windsor chairs,
  the presidential tribune, the beery atmosphere, sawdust, pipe-lights,
  spittoons and repose. But the last item was long, long, long, in linking
  itself to the rest. The novelty of the place, the coming upon it without
  preparation, the sense of being locked up, the remembrance of that room
  up-stairs, of the two brothers, and above all of the retiring childish
  form, and the face in which he now saw years of insufficient food, if
  not of want, kept him waking and unhappy.

  Speculations, too, bearing the strangest relations towards the prison,
  but always concerning the prison, ran like nightmares through his mind
  while he lay awake. Whether coffins were kept ready for people who might
  die there, where they were kept, how they were kept, where people who
  died in the prison were buried, how they were taken out, what forms were
  observed, whether an implacable creditor could arrest the dead? As to
  escaping, what chances there were of escape? Whether a prisoner could
  scale the walls with a cord and grapple, how he would descend upon
  the other side? whether he could alight on a housetop, steal down a
  staircase, let himself out at a door, and get lost in the crowd? As to
  Fire in the prison, if one were to break out while he lay there?

  And these involuntary starts of fancy were, after all, but the setting
  of a picture in which three people kept before him. His father, with the
  steadfast look with which he had died, prophetically darkened forth in
  the portrait; his mother, with her arm up, warding off his suspicion;
  Little Dorrit, with her hand on the degraded arm, and her drooping head
  turned away.

  What if his mother had an old reason she well knew for softening to
  this poor girl! What if the prisoner now sleeping quietly--Heaven grant
  it!--by the light of the great Day of judgment should trace back his
  fall to her. What if any act of hers and of his father's, should have
  even remotely brought the grey heads of those two brothers so low!

  A swift thought shot into his mind. In that long imprisonment here, and
  in her own long confinement to her room, did his mother find a balance
  to be struck? 'I admit that I was accessory to that man's captivity. I
  have suffered for it in kind. He has decayed in his prison: I in mine. I
  have paid the penalty.'

  When all the other thoughts had faded out, this one held possession
  of him. When he fell asleep, she came before him in her wheeled chair,
  warding him off with this justification. When he awoke, and sprang up
  causelessly frightened, the words were in his ears, as if her voice had
  slowly spoken them at his pillow, to break his rest: 'He withers away in
  his prison; I wither away in mine; inexorable justice is done; what do I
  owe on this score!'




The morning light was in no hurry to climb the prison wall and look in
at the Snuggery windows; and when it did come, it would have been more
welcome if it had come alone, instead of bringing a rush of rain with
it. But the equinoctial gales were blowing out at sea, and the impartial
south-west wind, in its flight, would not neglect even the narrow
Marshalsea. While it roared through the steeple of St George's Church,
    and twirled all the cowls in the neighbourhood, it made a swoop to beat
    the Southwark smoke into the jail; and, plunging down the chimneys
    of the few early collegians who were yet lighting their fires, half
    suffocated them.

    Arthur Clennam would have been little disposed to linger in bed, though
    his bed had been in a more private situation, and less affected by the
    raking out of yesterday's fire, the kindling of to-day's under the
    collegiate boiler, the filling of that Spartan vessel at the pump, the
    sweeping and sawdusting of the common room, and other such preparations.
    Heartily glad to see the morning, though little rested by the night, he
    turned out as soon as he could distinguish objects about him, and paced
    the yard for two heavy hours before the gate was opened.

    The walls were so near to one another, and the wild clouds hurried
    over them so fast, that it gave him a sensation like the beginning of
    sea-sickness to look up at the gusty sky. The rain, carried aslant by
    flaws of wind, blackened that side of the central building which he had
    visited last night, but left a narrow dry trough under the lee of the
    wall, where he walked up and down among the waits of straw and dust
    and paper, the waste droppings of the pump, and the stray leaves of
    yesterday's greens. It was as haggard a view of life as a man need look
    upon.

    Nor was it relieved by any glimpse of the little creature who had
    brought him there. Perhaps she glided out of her doorway and in at that
    where her father lived, while his face was turned from both; but he saw
    nothing of her. It was too early for her brother; to have seen him once,
    was to have seen enough of him to know that he would be sluggish to
    leave whatever frowsy bed he occupied at night; so, as Arthur Clennam
    walked up and down, waiting for the gate to open, he cast about in
    his mind for future rather than for present means of pursuing his
    discoveries.

    At last the lodge-gate turned, and the turnkey, standing on the step,
    taking an early comb at his hair, was ready to let him out. With a
    joyful sense of release he passed through the lodge, and found himself
    again in the little outer court-yard where he had spoken to the brother
    last night.

    There was a string of people already straggling in, whom it was not
    difficult to identify as the nondescript messengers, go-betweens, and
    errand-bearers of the place. Some of them had been lounging in the rain
    until the gate should open; others, who had timed their arrival
    with greater nicety, were coming up now, and passing in with damp
    whitey-brown paper bags from the grocers, loaves of bread, lumps of
    butter, eggs, milk, and the like. The shabbiness of these attendants
    upon shabbiness, the poverty of these insolvent waiters upon insolvency,
    was a sight to see. Such threadbare coats and trousers, such fusty gowns
    and shawls, such squashed hats and bonnets, such boots and shoes, such
    umbrellas and walking-sticks, never were seen in Rag Fair. All of
    them wore the cast-off clothes of other men and women, were made up of
    patches and pieces of other people's individuality, and had no sartorial
    existence of their own proper. Their walk was the walk of a race apart.
    They had a peculiar way of doggedly slinking round the corner, as if
    they were eternally going to the pawnbroker's. When they coughed, they
    coughed like people accustomed to be forgotten on doorsteps and in
    draughty passages, waiting for answers to letters in faded ink, which
    gave the recipients of those manuscripts great mental disturbance and no
    satisfaction. As they eyed the stranger in passing, they eyed him with
    borrowing eyes--hungry, sharp, speculative as to his softness if they
    were accredited to him, and the likelihood of his standing something
    handsome. Mendicity on commission stooped in their high shoulders,
    shambled in their unsteady legs, buttoned and pinned and darned and
    dragged their clothes, frayed their button-holes, leaked out of their
    figures in dirty little ends of tape, and issued from their mouths in
    alcoholic breathings.

    As these people passed him standing still in the court-yard, and one of
    them turned back to inquire if he could assist him with his services,
    it came into Arthur Clennam's mind that he would speak to Little Dorrit
    again before he went away. She would have recovered her first surprise,
    and might feel easier with him. He asked this member of the fraternity
    (who had two red herrings in his hand, and a loaf and a blacking brush
     under his arm), where was the nearest place to get a cup of coffee
    at. The nondescript replied in encouraging terms, and brought him to a
    coffee-shop in the street within a stone's throw.

    'Do you know Miss Dorrit?' asked the new client.

    The nondescript knew two Miss Dorrits; one who was born inside--That was
    the one! That was the one? The nondescript had known her many years.
    In regard of the other Miss Dorrit, the nondescript lodged in the same
    house with herself and uncle.

    This changed the client's half-formed design of remaining at the
    coffee-shop until the nondescript should bring him word that Dorrit
    had issued forth into the street. He entrusted the nondescript with a
    confidential message to her, importing that the visitor who had waited
    on her father last night, begged the favour of a few words with her at
    her uncle's lodging; he obtained from the same source full directions to
    the house, which was very near; dismissed the nondescript gratified with
    half-a-crown; and having hastily refreshed himself at the coffee-shop,
    repaired with all speed to the clarionet-player's dwelling.

    There were so many lodgers in this house that the doorpost seemed to be
    as full of bell-handles as a cathedral organ is of stops. Doubtful
    which might be the clarionet-stop, he was considering the point, when a
    shuttlecock flew out of the parlour window, and alighted on his hat.
    He then observed that in the parlour window was a blind with the
    inscription, MR CRIPPLES's ACADEMY; also in another line, EVENING
    TUITION; and behind the blind was a little white-faced boy, with a slice
    of bread-and-butter and a battledore. The window being accessible from
    the footway, he looked in over the blind, returned the shuttlecock, and
    put his question.

    'Dorrit?' said the little white-faced boy (Master Cripples in fact).
    '_Mr_ Dorrit? Third bell and one knock.'

    The pupils of Mr Cripples appeared to have been making a copy-book of
    the street-door, it was so extensively scribbled over in pencil. The
    frequency of the inscriptions, 'Old Dorrit,' and 'Dirty Dick,' in
    combination, suggested intentions of personality on the part Of Mr
    Cripples's pupils.  There was ample time to make these observations
    before the door was opened by the poor old man himself.

    'Ha!' said he, very slowly remembering Arthur, 'you were shut in last
    night?'

    'Yes, Mr Dorrit. I hope to meet your niece here presently.'

    'Oh!' said he, pondering. 'Out of my brother's way? True. Would you come
    up-stairs and wait for her?'

    'Thank you.'

    Turning himself as slowly as he turned in his mind whatever he heard or
    said, he led the way up the narrow stairs. The house was very close, and
    had an unwholesome smell. The little staircase windows looked in at the
    back windows of other houses as unwholesome as itself, with poles and
    lines thrust out of them, on which unsightly linen hung; as if the
    inhabitants were angling for clothes, and had had some wretched bites
    not worth attending to. In the back garret--a sickly room, with a
    turn-up bedstead in it, so hastily and recently turned up that the
    blankets were boiling over, as it were, and keeping the lid open--a
    half-finished breakfast of coffee and toast for two persons was jumbled
    down anyhow on a rickety table.

    There was no one there. The old man mumbling to himself, after some
    consideration, that Fanny had run away, went to the next room to fetch
    her back. The visitor, observing that she held the door on the inside,
    and that, when the uncle tried to open it, there was a sharp adjuration
    of 'Don't, stupid!' and an appearance of loose stocking and flannel,
    concluded that the young lady was in an undress. The uncle, without
    appearing to come to any conclusion, shuffled in again, sat down in his
    chair, and began warming his hands at the fire; not that it was cold, or
    that he had any waking idea whether it was or not.

    'What did you think of my brother, sir?' he asked, when he by-and-by
    discovered what he was doing, left off, reached over to the
    chimney-piece, and took his clarionet case down.

    'I was glad,' said Arthur, very much at a loss, for his thoughts were
    on the brother before him; 'to find him so well and cheerful.'

    'Ha!' muttered the old man, 'yes, yes, yes, yes, yes!'

    Arthur wondered what he could possibly want with the clarionet case. He
    did not want it at all. He discovered, in due time, that it was not the
    little paper of snuff (which was also on the chimney-piece), put it back
    again, took down the snuff instead, and solaced himself with a pinch. He
    was as feeble, spare, and slow in his pinches as in everything else, but
    a certain little trickling of enjoyment of them played in the poor worn
    nerves about the corners of his eyes and mouth.

    'Amy, Mr Clennam. What do you think of her?'

    'I am much impressed, Mr Dorrit, by all that I have seen of her and
    thought of her.'

    'My brother would have been quite lost without Amy,' he returned. 'We
    should all have been lost without Amy. She is a very good girl, Amy. She
    does her duty.'

    Arthur fancied that he heard in these praises a certain tone of custom,
    which he had heard from the father last night with an inward protest and
    feeling of antagonism. It was not that they stinted her praises, or
    were insensible to what she did for them; but that they were lazily
    habituated to her, as they were to all the rest of their condition.
    He fancied that although they had before them, every day, the means of
    comparison between her and one another and themselves, they regarded her
    as being in her necessary place; as holding a position towards them all
    which belonged to her, like her name or her age. He fancied that they
    viewed her, not as having risen away from the prison atmosphere, but as
    appertaining to it; as being vaguely what they had a right to expect,
    and nothing more.

    Her uncle resumed his breakfast, and was munching toast sopped in
    coffee, oblivious of his guest, when the third bell rang. That was Amy,
    he said, and went down to let her in; leaving the visitor with as vivid
    a picture on his mind of his begrimed hands, dirt-worn face, and decayed
    figure, as if he were still drooping in his chair.

    She came up after him, in the usual plain dress, and with the usual
    timid manner. Her lips were a little parted, as if her heart beat faster
    than usual.

    'Mr Clennam, Amy,' said her uncle, 'has been expecting you some time.'

    'I took the liberty of sending you a message.'

    'I received the message, sir.'

    'Are you going to my mother's this morning? I think not, for it is past
    your usual hour.'

    'Not to-day, sir. I am not wanted to-day.'

    'Will you allow Me to walk a little way in whatever direction you may
    be going? I can then speak to you as we walk, both without detaining you
    here, and without intruding longer here myself.'

    She looked embarrassed, but said, if he pleased. He made a pretence of
    having mislaid his walking-stick, to give her time to set the bedstead
    right, to answer her sister's impatient knock at the wall, and to say a
    word softly to her uncle. Then he found it, and they went down-stairs;
    she first, he following; the uncle standing at the stair-head, and
    probably forgetting them before they had reached the ground floor.

    Mr Cripples's pupils, who were by this time coming to school, desisted
    from their morning recreation of cuffing one another with bags and
    books, to stare with all the eyes they had at a stranger who had been
    to see Dirty Dick. They bore the trying spectacle in silence, until the
    mysterious visitor was at a safe distance; when they burst into pebbles
    and yells, and likewise into reviling dances, and in all respects buried
    the pipe of peace with so many savage ceremonies, that, if Mr Cripples
    had been the chief of the Cripplewayboo tribe with his war-paint on,
    they could scarcely have done greater justice to their education.

    In the midst of this homage, Mr Arthur Clennam offered his arm to Little
    Dorrit, and Little Dorrit took it. 'Will you go by the Iron Bridge,'
    said he, 'where there is an escape from the noise of the street?' Little
    Dorrit answered, if he pleased, and presently ventured to hope that he
    would 'not mind' Mr Cripples's boys, for she had herself received
    her education, such as it was, in Mr Cripples's evening academy. He
    returned, with the best will in the world, that Mr Cripples's boys were
    forgiven out of the bottom of his soul. Thus did Cripples unconsciously
    become a master of the ceremonies between them, and bring them more
    naturally together than Beau Nash might have done if they had lived
    in his golden days, and he had alighted from his coach and six for the
    purpose.

    The morning remained squally, and the streets were miserably muddy, but
    no rain fell as they walked towards the Iron Bridge. The little creature
    seemed so young in his eyes, that there were moments when he found
    himself thinking of her, if not speaking to her, as if she were a child.
    Perhaps he seemed as old in her eyes as she seemed young in his.

    'I am sorry to hear you were so inconvenienced last night, sir, as to be
    locked in. It was very unfortunate.'

    It was nothing, he returned. He had had a very good bed.

    'Oh yes!' she said quickly; 'she believed there were excellent beds at
    the coffee-house.' He noticed that the coffee-house was quite a majestic
    hotel to her, and that she treasured its reputation.

    'I believe it is very expensive,' said Little Dorrit, 'but my father has
    told me that quite beautiful dinners may be got there. And wine,' she
    added timidly.

    'Were you ever there?'

    'Oh no! Only into the kitchen to fetch hot water.'

    To think of growing up with a kind of awe upon one as to the luxuries of
    that superb establishment, the Marshalsea Hotel!

    'I asked you last night,' said Clennam, 'how you had become acquainted
    with my mother. Did you ever hear her name before she sent for you?'

    'No, sir.'

    'Do you think your father ever did?'

    'No, sir.'

    He met her eyes raised to his with so much wonder in them (she was
            scared when the encounter took place, and shrunk away again), that he
    felt it necessary to say:

    'I have a reason for asking, which I cannot very well explain; but you
    must, on no account, suppose it to be of a nature to cause you the least
    alarm or anxiety. Quite the reverse. And you think that at no time of
    your father's life was my name of Clennam ever familiar to him?'

    'No, sir.'

    He felt, from the tone in which she spoke, that she was glancing up at
    him with those parted lips; therefore he looked before him, rather than
    make her heart beat quicker still by embarrassing her afresh.

    Thus they emerged upon the Iron Bridge, which was as quiet after the
    roaring streets as though it had been open country. The wind blew
    roughly, the wet squalls came rattling past them, skimming the pools on
    the road and pavement, and raining them down into the river. The clouds
    raced on furiously in the lead-coloured sky, the smoke and mist raced
    after them, the dark tide ran fierce and strong in the same direction.
    Little Dorrit seemed the least, the quietest, and weakest of Heaven's
    creatures.

    'Let me put you in a coach,' said Clennam, very nearly adding 'my poor
    child.'

    She hurriedly declined, saying that wet or dry made little difference to
    her; she was used to go about in all weathers. He knew it to be so, and
    was touched with more pity; thinking of the slight figure at his side,
    making its nightly way through the damp dark boisterous streets to such
    a place of rest.

    'You spoke so feelingly to me last night, sir, and I found afterwards
    that you had been so generous to my father, that I could not resist your
    message, if it was only to thank you; especially as I wished very much
    to say to you--' she hesitated and trembled, and tears rose in her eyes,
    but did not fall.

    'To say to me--?'

    'That I hope you will not misunderstand my father. Don't judge him, sir,
    as you would judge others outside the gates. He has been there so long!
    I never saw him outside, but I can understand that he must have grown
    different in some things since.'

    'My thoughts will never be unjust or harsh towards him, believe me.'

    'Not,' she said, with a prouder air, as the misgiving evidently crept
    upon her that she might seem to be abandoning him, 'not that he has
    anything to be ashamed of for himself, or that I have anything to be
    ashamed of for him. He only requires to be understood. I only ask for
    him that his life may be fairly remembered. All that he said was quite
    true. It all happened just as he related it. He is very much respected.
    Everybody who comes in, is glad to know him. He is more courted than
    anyone else. He is far more thought of than the Marshal is.'

    If ever pride were innocent, it was innocent in Little Dorrit when she
    grew boastful of her father.

    'It is often said that his manners are a true gentleman's, and quite
    a study. I see none like them in that place, but he is admitted to
    be superior to all the rest. This is quite as much why they make him
    presents, as because they know him to be needy. He is not to be blamed
    for being in need, poor love. Who could be in prison a quarter of a
    century, and be prosperous!'

    What affection in her words, what compassion in her repressed tears,
    what a great soul of fidelity within her, how true the light that shed
    false brightness round him!

    'If I have found it best to conceal where my home is, it is not because
    I am ashamed of him. God forbid! Nor am I so much ashamed of the place
    itself as might be supposed. People are not bad because they come there.
    I have known numbers of good, persevering, honest people come there
    through misfortune. They are almost all kind-hearted to one another.
    And it would be ungrateful indeed in me, to forget that I have had many
    quiet, comfortable hours there; that I had an excellent friend there
    when I was quite a baby, who was very very fond of me; that I have been
    taught there, and have worked there, and have slept soundly there. I
    think it would be almost cowardly and cruel not to have some little
    attachment for it, after all this.'

    She had relieved the faithful fulness of her heart, and modestly said,
    raising her eyes appealingly to her new friend's, 'I did not mean to say
    so much, nor have I ever but once spoken about this before. But it seems
    to set it more right than it was last night. I said I wished you had
    not followed me, sir. I don't wish it so much now, unless you should
    think--indeed I don't wish it at all, unless I should have spoken so
    confusedly, that--that you can scarcely understand me, which I am afraid
    may be the case.'

    He told her with perfect truth that it was not the case; and putting
    himself between her and the sharp wind and rain, sheltered her as well
    as he could.

    'I feel permitted now,' he said, 'to ask you a little more concerning
    your father. Has he many creditors?'

    'Oh! a great number.'

    'I mean detaining creditors, who keep him where he is?'

    'Oh yes! a great number.'

    'Can you tell me--I can get the information, no doubt, elsewhere, if you
    cannot--who is the most influential of them?'

    Little Dorrit said, after considering a little, that she used to
    hear long ago of Mr Tite Barnacle as a man of great power. He was a
    commissioner, or a board, or a trustee, 'or something.' He lived
    in Grosvenor Square, she thought, or very near it. He was under
    Government--high in the Circumlocution Office. She appeared to have
    acquired, in her infancy, some awful impression of the might of this
    formidable Mr Tite Barnacle of Grosvenor Square, or very near it, and
    the Circumlocution Office, which quite crushed her when she mentioned
    him.

    'It can do no harm,' thought Arthur, 'if I see this Mr Tite Barnacle.'

    The thought did not present itself so quietly but that her quickness
    intercepted it. 'Ah!' said Little Dorrit, shaking her head with the mild
    despair of a lifetime. 'Many people used to think once of getting my
    poor father out, but you don't know how hopeless it is.'

    She forgot to be shy at the moment, in honestly warning him away from
    the sunken wreck he had a dream of raising; and looked at him with
    eyes which assuredly, in association with her patient face, her fragile
    figure, her spare dress, and the wind and rain, did not turn him from
    his purpose of helping her.

    'Even if it could be done,' said she--'and it never can be done
    now--where could father live, or how could he live? I have often thought
    that if such a change could come, it might be anything but a service to
    him now. People might not think so well of him outside as they do there.
    He might not be so gently dealt with outside as he is there. He might
    not be so fit himself for the life outside as he is for that.'

    Here for the first time she could not restrain her tears from falling;
    and the little thin hands he had watched when they were so busy,
    trembled as they clasped each other.

    'It would be a new distress to him even to know that I earn a little
    money, and that Fanny earns a little money. He is so anxious about us,
    you see, feeling helplessly shut up there. Such a good, good father!'

    He let the little burst of feeling go by before he spoke. It was soon
    gone. She was not accustomed to think of herself, or to trouble any one
    with her emotions. He had but glanced away at the piles of city roofs
    and chimneys among which the smoke was rolling heavily, and at the
    wilderness of masts on the river, and the wilderness of steeples on
    the shore, indistinctly mixed together in the stormy haze, when she
    was again as quiet as if she had been plying her needle in his mother's
    room.

    'You would be glad to have your brother set at liberty?'

    'Oh very, very glad, sir!'

    'Well, we will hope for him at least. You told me last night of a friend
    you had?'

    His name was Plornish, Little Dorrit said.

    And where did Plornish live? Plornish lived in Bleeding Heart Yard. He
    was 'only a plasterer,' Little Dorrit said, as a caution to him not to
    form high social expectations of Plornish. He lived at the last house in
    Bleeding Heart Yard, and his name was over a little gateway.

    Arthur took down the address and gave her his. He had now done all he
    sought to do for the present, except that he wished to leave her with a
    reliance upon him, and to have something like a promise from her that
    she would cherish it.

    'There is one friend!' he said, putting up his pocketbook. 'As I take
    you back--you are going back?'

    'Oh yes! going straight home.'

    '--As I take you back,' the word home jarred upon him, 'let me ask you to
    persuade yourself that you have another friend. I make no professions,
    and say no more.'

    'You are truly kind to me, sir. I am sure I need no more.'

    They walked back through the miserable muddy streets, and among the
    poor, mean shops, and were jostled by the crowds of dirty hucksters
    usual to a poor neighbourhood. There was nothing, by the short way, that
    was pleasant to any of the five senses. Yet it was not a common passage
    through common rain, and mire, and noise, to Clennam, having this
    little, slender, careful creature on his arm. How young she seemed to
    him, or how old he to her; or what a secret either to the other, in that
    beginning of the destined interweaving of their stories, matters not
    here. He thought of her having been born and bred among these scenes,
    and shrinking through them now, familiar yet misplaced; he thought
    of her long acquaintance with the squalid needs of life, and of her
    innocence; of her solicitude for others, and her few years, and her
    childish aspect.

    They were come into the High Street, where the prison stood, when a
    voice cried, 'Little mother, little mother!' Little Dorrit stopping and
    looking back, an excited figure of a strange kind bounced against them
    (still crying 'little mother'), fell down, and scattered the contents of
    a large basket, filled with potatoes, in the mud.

    'Oh, Maggy,' said Little Dorrit, 'what a clumsy child you are!'

    Maggy was not hurt, but picked herself up immediately, and then began
    to pick up the potatoes, in which both Little Dorrit and Arthur Clennam
    helped. Maggy picked up very few potatoes and a great quantity of mud;
    but they were all recovered, and deposited in the basket. Maggy then
    smeared her muddy face with her shawl, and presenting it to Mr Clennam
    as a type of purity, enabled him to see what she was like.

    She was about eight-and-twenty, with large bones, large features, large
    feet and hands, large eyes and no hair. Her large eyes were limpid and
    almost colourless; they seemed to be very little affected by light,
    and to stand unnaturally still. There was also that attentive listening
    expression in her face, which is seen in the faces of the blind; but she
    was not blind, having one tolerably serviceable eye. Her face was not
    exceedingly ugly, though it was only redeemed from being so by a smile;
    a good-humoured smile, and pleasant in itself, but rendered pitiable
    by being constantly there. A great white cap, with a quantity of
    opaque frilling that was always flapping about, apologised for Maggy's
    baldness, and made it so very difficult for her old black bonnet to
    retain its place upon her head, that it held on round her neck like a
    gipsy's baby. A commission of haberdashers could alone have reported
    what the rest of her poor dress was made of, but it had a strong general
    resemblance to seaweed, with here and there a gigantic tea-leaf. Her
    shawl looked particularly like a tea-leaf after long infusion.

    Arthur Clennam looked at Little Dorrit with the expression of one
    saying, 'May I ask who this is?' Little Dorrit, whose hand this Maggy,
    still calling her little mother, had begun to fondle, answered in words
    (they were under a gateway into which the majority of the potatoes had
     rolled).

    'This is Maggy, sir.'

    'Maggy, sir,' echoed the personage presented. 'Little mother!'

    'She is the grand-daughter--' said Little Dorrit.

    'Grand-daughter,' echoed Maggy.

    'Of my old nurse, who has been dead a long time. Maggy, how old are
    you?'

    'Ten, mother,' said Maggy.

    'You can't think how good she is, sir,' said Little Dorrit, with
    infinite tenderness.

    'Good _she_ is,' echoed Maggy, transferring the pronoun in a most
    expressive way from herself to her little mother.

    'Or how clever,' said Little Dorrit. 'She goes on errands as well as
    any one.' Maggy laughed. 'And is as trustworthy as the Bank of England.'
    Maggy laughed. 'She earns her own living entirely. Entirely, sir!' said
    Little Dorrit, in a lower and triumphant tone. 'Really does!'

    'What is her history?' asked Clennam.

    'Think of that, Maggy?' said Little Dorrit, taking her two large hands
    and clapping them together. 'A gentleman from thousands of miles away,
    wanting to know your history!'

    '_My_ history?' cried Maggy. 'Little mother.'

    'She means me,' said Little Dorrit, rather confused; 'she is very much
    attached to me. Her old grandmother was not so kind to her as she should
    have been; was she, Maggy?'

    Maggy shook her head, made a drinking vessel of her clenched left hand,
    drank out of it, and said, 'Gin.' Then beat an imaginary child, and said,
    'Broom-handles and pokers.'

    'When Maggy was ten years old,' said Little Dorrit, watching her face
    while she spoke, 'she had a bad fever, sir, and she has never grown any
    older ever since.'

    'Ten years old,' said Maggy, nodding her head. 'But what a nice
    hospital! So comfortable, wasn't it? Oh so nice it was. Such a Ev'nly
    place!'

    'She had never been at peace before, sir,' said Little Dorrit, turning
    towards Arthur for an instant and speaking low, 'and she always runs off
    upon that.'

    'Such beds there is there!' cried Maggy. 'Such lemonades! Such oranges!
    Such d'licious broth and wine! Such Chicking! Oh, AIN'T it a delightful
    place to go and stop at!'

    'So Maggy stopped there as long as she could,' said Little Dorrit,
    in her former tone of telling a child's story; the tone designed for
    Maggy's ear, 'and at last, when she could stop there no longer, she came
    out. Then, because she was never to be more than ten years old, however
    long she lived--'

    'However long she lived,' echoed Maggy.

    '--And because she was very weak; indeed was so weak that when she began
    to laugh she couldn't stop herself--which was a great pity--'

(Maggy mighty grave of a sudden.)

    '--Her grandmother did not know what to do with her, and for some years
    was very unkind to her indeed. At length, in course of time, Maggy began
    to take pains to improve herself, and to be very attentive and very
    industrious; and by degrees was allowed to come in and out as often as
    she liked, and got enough to do to support herself, and does support
    herself. And that,' said Little Dorrit, clapping the two great hands
    together again, 'is Maggy's history, as Maggy knows!'

    Ah! But Arthur would have known what was wanting to its completeness,
    though he had never heard of the words Little mother; though he had
    never seen the fondling of the small spare hand; though he had had no
    sight for the tears now standing in the colourless eyes; though he had
    had no hearing for the sob that checked the clumsy laugh. The dirty
    gateway with the wind and rain whistling through it, and the basket of
    muddy potatoes waiting to be spilt again or taken up, never seemed the
    common hole it really was, when he looked back to it by these lights.
    Never, never!

    They were very near the end of their walk, and they now came out of the
    gateway to finish it. Nothing would serve Maggy but that they must stop
    at a grocer's window, short of their destination, for her to show her
    learning. She could read after a sort; and picked out the fat figures in
    the tickets of prices, for the most part correctly. She also stumbled,
    with a large balance of success against her failures, through various
    philanthropic recommendations to Try our Mixture, Try our Family Black,
    Try our Orange-flavoured Pekoe, challenging competition at the head
    of Flowery Teas; and various cautions to the public against spurious
    establishments and adulterated articles. When he saw how pleasure
    brought a rosy tint into Little Dorrit's face when Maggy made a hit,
    he felt that he could have stood there making a library of the grocer's
    window until the rain and wind were tired.

    The court-yard received them at last, and there he said goodbye to
    Little Dorrit. Little as she had always looked, she looked less than
    ever when he saw her going into the Marshalsea lodge passage, the little
    mother attended by her big child.

    The cage door opened, and when the small bird, reared in captivity, had
    tamely fluttered in, he saw it shut again; and then he came away.




The Circumlocution Office was (as everybody knows without being told)
    the most important Department under Government. No public business of
    any kind could possibly be done at any time without the acquiescence of
    the Circumlocution Office. Its finger was in the largest public pie,
    and in the smallest public tart. It was equally impossible to do the
    plainest right and to undo the plainest wrong without the express
    authority of the Circumlocution Office. If another Gunpowder Plot had
    been discovered half an hour before the lighting of the match, nobody
    would have been justified in saving the parliament until there had
    been half a score of boards, half a bushel of minutes, several sacks
    of official memoranda, and a family-vault full of ungrammatical
    correspondence, on the part of the Circumlocution Office.

    This glorious establishment had been early in the field, when the one
    sublime principle involving the difficult art of governing a country,
    was first distinctly revealed to statesmen. It had been foremost to
    study that bright revelation and to carry its shining influence through
    the whole of the official proceedings. Whatever was required to be done,
    the Circumlocution Office was beforehand with all the public departments
    in the art of perceiving--HOW NOT TO DO IT.

    Through this delicate perception, through the tact with which it
    invariably seized it, and through the genius with which it always acted
    on it, the Circumlocution Office had risen to overtop all the public
    departments; and the public condition had risen to be--what it was.

    It is true that How not to do it was the great study and object of
    all public departments and professional politicians all round the
    Circumlocution Office. It is true that every new premier and every
    new government, coming in because they had upheld a certain thing as
    necessary to be done, were no sooner come in than they applied their
    utmost faculties to discovering How not to do it. It is true that from
    the moment when a general election was over, every returned man who had
    been raving on hustings because it hadn't been done, and who had been
    asking the friends of the honourable gentleman in the opposite interest
    on pain of impeachment to tell him why it hadn't been done, and who had
    been asserting that it must be done, and who had been pledging himself
    that it should be done, began to devise, How it was not to be done. It
    is true that the debates of both Houses of Parliament the whole session
    through, uniformly tended to the protracted deliberation, How not to
    do it. It is true that the royal speech at the opening of such session
    virtually said, My lords and gentlemen, you have a considerable
    stroke of work to do, and you will please to retire to your respective
    chambers, and discuss, How not to do it. It is true that the royal
    speech, at the close of such session, virtually said, My lords and
    gentlemen, you have through several laborious months been considering
    with great loyalty and patriotism, How not to do it, and you have found
    out; and with the blessing of Providence upon the harvest (natural, not
            political), I now dismiss you. All this is true, but the Circumlocution
    Office went beyond it.

    Because the Circumlocution Office went on mechanically, every day,
    keeping this wonderful, all-sufficient wheel of statesmanship, How not
    to do it, in motion. Because the Circumlocution Office was down upon any
    ill-advised public servant who was going to do it, or who appeared to be
    by any surprising accident in remote danger of doing it, with a minute,
    and a memorandum, and a letter of instructions that extinguished him. It
    was this spirit of national efficiency in the Circumlocution Office
    that had gradually led to its having something to do with everything.
    Mechanicians, natural philosophers, soldiers, sailors, petitioners,
    memorialists, people with grievances, people who wanted to prevent
    grievances, people who wanted to redress grievances, jobbing people,
    jobbed people, people who couldn't get rewarded for merit, and people
    who couldn't get punished for demerit, were all indiscriminately tucked
    up under the foolscap paper of the Circumlocution Office.

    Numbers of people were lost in the Circumlocution Office. Unfortunates
    with wrongs, or with projects for the general welfare (and they had
            better have had wrongs at first, than have taken that bitter English
            recipe for certainly getting them), who in slow lapse of time and agony
    had passed safely through other public departments; who, according to
    rule, had been bullied in this, over-reached by that, and evaded by
    the other; got referred at last to the Circumlocution Office, and
    never reappeared in the light of day. Boards sat upon them, secretaries
    minuted upon them, commissioners gabbled about them, clerks registered,
    entered, checked, and ticked them off, and they melted away. In short,
    all the business of the country went through the Circumlocution Office,
    except the business that never came out of it; and _its_ name was Legion.

    Sometimes, angry spirits attacked the Circumlocution Office. Sometimes,
    parliamentary questions were asked about it, and even parliamentary
    motions made or threatened about it by demagogues so low and ignorant as
    to hold that the real recipe of government was, How to do it. Then would
    the noble lord, or right honourable gentleman, in whose department it
    was to defend the Circumlocution Office, put an orange in his pocket,
    and make a regular field-day of the occasion. Then would he come down to
    that house with a slap upon the table, and meet the honourable gentleman
    foot to foot. Then would he be there to tell that honourable gentleman
    that the Circumlocution Office not only was blameless in this matter,
    but was commendable in this matter, was extollable to the skies in this
    matter. Then would he be there to tell that honourable gentleman that,
    although the Circumlocution Office was invariably right and wholly
    right, it never was so right as in this matter. Then would he be there
    to tell that honourable gentleman that it would have been more to his
    honour, more to his credit, more to his good taste, more to his good
    sense, more to half the dictionary of commonplaces, if he had left the
    Circumlocution Office alone, and never approached this matter. Then
    would he keep one eye upon a coach or crammer from the Circumlocution
    Office sitting below the bar, and smash the honourable gentleman with
    the Circumlocution Office account of this matter. And although one
    of two things always happened; namely, either that the Circumlocution
    Office had nothing to say and said it, or that it had something to say
    of which the noble lord, or right honourable gentleman, blundered one
    half and forgot the other; the Circumlocution Office was always voted
    immaculate by an accommodating majority.

    Such a nursery of statesmen had the Department become in virtue of a
    long career of this nature, that several solemn lords had attained the
    reputation of being quite unearthly prodigies of business, solely from
    having practised, How not to do it, as the head of the Circumlocution
    Office. As to the minor priests and acolytes of that temple, the result
    of all this was that they stood divided into two classes, and, down to
    the junior messenger, either believed in the Circumlocution Office as
    a heaven-born institution that had an absolute right to do whatever it
    liked; or took refuge in total infidelity, and considered it a flagrant
    nuisance.

    The Barnacle family had for some time helped to administer the
    Circumlocution Office. The Tite Barnacle Branch, indeed, considered
    themselves in a general way as having vested rights in that direction,
    and took it ill if any other family had much to say to it. The Barnacles
    were a very high family, and a very large family. They were dispersed
    all over the public offices, and held all sorts of public places. Either
    the nation was under a load of obligation to the Barnacles, or the
    Barnacles were under a load of obligation to the nation. It was not
    quite unanimously settled which; the Barnacles having their opinion, the
    nation theirs.

    The Mr Tite Barnacle who at the period now in question usually coached
    or crammed the statesman at the head of the Circumlocution Office, when
    that noble or right honourable individual sat a little uneasily in his
    saddle by reason of some vagabond making a tilt at him in a newspaper,
    was more flush of blood than money. As a Barnacle he had his place,
    which was a snug thing enough; and as a Barnacle he had of course put
    in his son Barnacle Junior in the office. But he had intermarried with
    a branch of the Stiltstalkings, who were also better endowed in a
    sanguineous point of view than with real or personal property, and of
    this marriage there had been issue, Barnacle junior and three young
    ladies. What with the patrician requirements of Barnacle junior, the
    three young ladies, Mrs Tite Barnacle nee Stiltstalking, and himself,
    Mr Tite Barnacle found the intervals between quarter day and quarter day
    rather longer than he could have desired; a circumstance which he always
    attributed to the country's parsimony.

    For Mr Tite Barnacle, Mr Arthur Clennam made his fifth inquiry one day
    at the Circumlocution Office; having on previous occasions awaited that
    gentleman successively in a hall, a glass case, a waiting room, and a
    fire-proof passage where the Department seemed to keep its wind. On this
    occasion Mr Barnacle was not engaged, as he had been before, with the
    noble prodigy at the head of the Department; but was absent. Barnacle
    Junior, however, was announced as a lesser star, yet visible above the
    office horizon.

    With Barnacle junior, he signified his desire to confer; and found that
    young gentleman singeing the calves of his legs at the parental fire,
    and supporting his spine against the mantel-shelf. It was a comfortable
    room, handsomely furnished in the higher official manner; an presenting
    stately suggestions of the absent Barnacle, in the thick carpet, the
    leather-covered desk to sit at, the leather-covered desk to stand at,
    the formidable easy-chair and hearth-rug, the interposed screen, the
    torn-up papers, the dispatch-boxes with little labels sticking out of
    them, like medicine bottles or dead game, the pervading smell of leather
    and mahogany, and a general bamboozling air of How not to do it.

    The present Barnacle, holding Mr Clennam's card in his hand, had a
    youthful aspect, and the fluffiest little whisker, perhaps, that ever
    was seen. Such a downy tip was on his callow chin, that he seemed half
    fledged like a young bird; and a compassionate observer might have urged
    that, if he had not singed the calves of his legs, he would have died
    of cold. He had a superior eye-glass dangling round his neck, but
    unfortunately had such flat orbits to his eyes and such limp little
    eyelids that it wouldn't stick in when he put it up, but kept tumbling
    out against his waistcoat buttons with a click that discomposed him very
    much.

    'Oh, I say. Look here! My father's not in the way, and won't be in the
    way to-day,' said Barnacle Junior. 'Is this anything that I can do?'

    (Click! Eye-glass down. Barnacle Junior quite frightened and feeling all
     round himself, but not able to find it.)

    'You are very good,' said Arthur Clennam. 'I wish however to see Mr
    Barnacle.'

    'But I say. Look here! You haven't got any appointment, you know,' said
    Barnacle Junior.

(By this time he had found the eye-glass, and put it up again.)

    'No,' said Arthur Clennam. 'That is what I wish to have.'

    'But I say. Look here! Is this public business?' asked Barnacle junior.

    (Click! Eye-glass down again. Barnacle Junior in that state of search
     after it that Mr Clennam felt it useless to reply at present.)

    'Is it,' said Barnacle junior, taking heed of his visitor's brown face,
    'anything about--Tonnage--or that sort of thing?'

    (Pausing for a reply, he opened his right eye with his hand, and stuck
     his glass in it, in that inflammatory manner that his eye began watering
     dreadfully.)

    'No,' said Arthur, 'it is nothing about tonnage.'

    'Then look here. Is it private business?'

    'I really am not sure. It relates to a Mr Dorrit.'

    'Look here, I tell you what! You had better call at our house, if you
    are going that way. Twenty-four, Mews Street, Grosvenor Square. My
    father's got a slight touch of the gout, and is kept at home by it.'

    (The misguided young Barnacle evidently going blind on his eye-glass
     side, but ashamed to make any further alteration in his painful
     arrangements.)

    'Thank you. I will call there now. Good morning.' Young Barnacle seemed
    discomfited at this, as not having at all expected him to go.

    'You are quite sure,' said Barnacle junior, calling after him when he
    got to the door, unwilling wholly to relinquish the bright business idea
    he had conceived; 'that it's nothing about Tonnage?'

    'Quite sure.'

    With such assurance, and rather wondering what might have taken place
    if it _had_ been anything about tonnage, Mr Clennam withdrew to pursue his
    inquiries.

    Mews Street, Grosvenor Square, was not absolutely Grosvenor Square
    itself, but it was very near it. It was a hideous little street of dead
    wall, stables, and dunghills, with lofts over coach-houses inhabited by
    coachmen's families, who had a passion for drying clothes and decorating
    their window-sills with miniature turnpike-gates. The principal
    chimney-sweep of that fashionable quarter lived at the blind end of Mews
    Street; and the same corner contained an establishment much frequented
    about early morning and twilight for the purchase of wine-bottles and
    kitchen-stuff. Punch's shows used to lean against the dead wall in Mews
    Street, while their proprietors were dining elsewhere; and the dogs of
    the neighbourhood made appointments to meet in the same locality. Yet
    there were two or three small airless houses at the entrance end of Mews
    Street, which went at enormous rents on account of their being abject
    hangers-on to a fashionable situation; and whenever one of these fearful
    little coops was to be let (which seldom happened, for they were in
            great request), the house agent advertised it as a gentlemanly residence
    in the most aristocratic part of town, inhabited solely by the elite of
    the beau monde.

    If a gentlemanly residence coming strictly within this narrow margin had
    not been essential to the blood of the Barnacles, this particular branch
    would have had a pretty wide selection among, let us say, ten thousand
    houses, offering fifty times the accommodation for a third of the money.
    As it was, Mr Barnacle, finding his gentlemanly residence extremely
    inconvenient and extremely dear, always laid it, as a public servant,
    at the door of the country, and adduced it as another instance of the
    country's parsimony.

    Arthur Clennam came to a squeezed house, with a ramshackle bowed
    front, little dingy windows, and a little dark area like a damp
    waistcoat-pocket, which he found to be number twenty-four, Mews Street,
    Grosvenor Square. To the sense of smell the house was like a sort of
    bottle filled with a strong distillation of Mews; and when the footman
    opened the door, he seemed to take the stopper out.

    The footman was to the Grosvenor Square footmen, what the house was to
    the Grosvenor Square houses. Admirable in his way, his way was a back
    and a bye way. His gorgeousness was not unmixed with dirt; and both in
    complexion and consistency he had suffered from the closeness of his
    pantry. A sallow flabbiness was upon him when he took the stopper out,
    and presented the bottle to Mr Clennam's nose.

    'Be so good as to give that card to Mr Tite Barnacle, and to say that I
    have just now seen the younger Mr Barnacle, who recommended me to call
    here.'

    The footman (who had as many large buttons with the Barnacle crest upon
            them on the flaps of his pockets, as if he were the family strong box,
            and carried the plate and jewels about with him buttoned up) pondered
    over the card a little; then said, 'Walk in.' It required some judgment
    to do it without butting the inner hall-door open, and in the consequent
    mental confusion and physical darkness slipping down the kitchen stairs.
    The visitor, however, brought himself up safely on the door-mat.

    Still the footman said 'Walk in,' so the visitor followed him. At the
    inner hall-door, another bottle seemed to be presented and another
    stopper taken out. This second vial appeared to be filled with
    concentrated provisions and extract of Sink from the pantry. After a
    skirmish in the narrow passage, occasioned by the footman's opening the
    door of the dismal dining-room with confidence, finding some one there
    with consternation, and backing on the visitor with disorder, the
    visitor was shut up, pending his announcement, in a close back parlour.
    There he had an opportunity of refreshing himself with both the
    bottles at once, looking out at a low blinding wall three feet off,
    and speculating on the number of Barnacle families within the bills of
    mortality who lived in such hutches of their own free flunkey choice.

    Mr Barnacle would see him. Would he walk up-stairs? He would, and
    he did; and in the drawing-room, with his leg on a rest, he found Mr
    Barnacle himself, the express image and presentment of How not to do it.

    Mr Barnacle dated from a better time, when the country was not so
    parsimonious and the Circumlocution Office was not so badgered. He wound
    and wound folds of white cravat round his neck, as he wound and wound
    folds of tape and paper round the neck of the country. His wristbands
    and collar were oppressive; his voice and manner were oppressive. He
    had a large watch-chain and bunch of seals, a coat buttoned up to
    inconvenience, a waistcoat buttoned up to inconvenience, an unwrinkled
    pair of trousers, a stiff pair of boots. He was altogether splendid,
    massive, overpowering, and impracticable. He seemed to have been sitting
    for his portrait to Sir Thomas Lawrence all the days of his life.

    'Mr Clennam?' said Mr Barnacle. 'Be seated.'

    Mr Clennam became seated.

    'You have called on me, I believe,' said Mr Barnacle, 'at the
    Circumlocution--' giving it the air of a word of about five-and-twenty
    syllables--'Office.'

    'I have taken that liberty.'

    Mr Barnacle solemnly bent his head as who should say, 'I do not deny
    that it is a liberty; proceed to take another liberty, and let me know
    your business.'

    'Allow me to observe that I have been for some years in China, am quite
    a stranger at home, and have no personal motive or interest in the
    inquiry I am about to make.'

    Mr Barnacle tapped his fingers on the table, and, as if he were now
    sitting for his portrait to a new and strange artist, appeared to say
    to his visitor, 'If you will be good enough to take me with my present
    lofty expression, I shall feel obliged.'

    'I have found a debtor in the Marshalsea Prison of the name of Dorrit,
    who has been there many years. I wish to investigate his confused
    affairs so far as to ascertain whether it may not be possible, after
    this lapse of time, to ameliorate his unhappy condition. The name of
    Mr Tite Barnacle has been mentioned to me as representing some highly
    influential interest among his creditors. Am I correctly informed?'

    It being one of the principles of the Circumlocution Office never, on
    any account whatever, to give a straightforward answer, Mr Barnacle
    said, 'Possibly.'

    'On behalf of the Crown, may I ask, or as private individual?'

    'The Circumlocution Department, sir,' Mr Barnacle replied, 'may have
    possibly recommended--possibly--I cannot say--that some public claim
    against the insolvent estate of a firm or copartnership to which this
    person may have belonged, should be enforced. The question may have
    been, in the course of official business, referred to the Circumlocution
    Department for its consideration. The Department may have either
    originated, or confirmed, a Minute making that recommendation.'

    'I assume this to be the case, then.'

    'The Circumlocution Department,' said Mr Barnacle, 'is not responsible
    for any gentleman's assumptions.'

    'May I inquire how I can obtain official information as to the real
    state of the case?'

    'It is competent,' said Mr Barnacle, 'to any member of the--Public,'
    mentioning that obscure body with reluctance, as his natural enemy,
    'to memorialise the Circumlocution Department. Such formalities as are
    required to be observed in so doing, may be known on application to the
    proper branch of that Department.'

    'Which is the proper branch?'

    'I must refer you,' returned Mr Barnacle, ringing the bell, 'to the
    Department itself for a formal answer to that inquiry.'

    'Excuse my mentioning--'

    'The Department is accessible to the--Public,' Mr Barnacle was always
    checked a little by that word of impertinent signification, 'if
    the--Public approaches it according to the official forms; if
    the--Public does not approach it according to the official forms,
    the--Public has itself to blame.'

    Mr Barnacle made him a severe bow, as a wounded man of family, a wounded
    man of place, and a wounded man of a gentlemanly residence, all rolled
    into one; and he made Mr Barnacle a bow, and was shut out into Mews
    Street by the flabby footman.

    Having got to this pass, he resolved as an exercise in perseverance,
    to betake himself again to the Circumlocution Office, and try what
    satisfaction he could get there. So he went back to the Circumlocution
    Office, and once more sent up his card to Barnacle junior by a messenger
    who took it very ill indeed that he should come back again, and who was
    eating mashed potatoes and gravy behind a partition by the hall fire.

    He was readmitted to the presence of Barnacle junior, and found that
    young gentleman singeing his knees now, and gaping his weary way on
    to four o'clock.

    'I say. Look here. You stick to us in a devil of a manner,' Said
    Barnacle junior, looking over his shoulder.

    'I want to know--'

    'Look here. Upon my soul you mustn't come into the place saying you
    want to know, you know,' remonstrated Barnacle junior, turning about and
    putting up the eye-glass.

    'I want to know,' said Arthur Clennam, who had made up his mind to
    persistence in one short form of words, 'the precise nature of the claim
    of the Crown against a prisoner for debt, named Dorrit.'

    'I say. Look here. You really are going it at a great pace, you know.
    Egad, you haven't got an appointment,' said Barnacle junior, as if the
    thing were growing serious.

    'I want to know,' said Arthur, and repeated his case.

    Barnacle junior stared at him until his eye-glass fell out, and then
    put it in again and stared at him until it fell out again. 'You have
    no right to come this sort of move,' he then observed with the greatest
    weakness. 'Look here. What do you mean? You told me you didn't know
    whether it was public business or not.'

    'I have now ascertained that it is public business,' returned the
    suitor, 'and I want to know'--and again repeated his monotonous inquiry.

    Its effect upon young Barnacle was to make him repeat in a defenceless
    way, 'Look here! Upon my SOUL you mustn't come into the place saying you
    want to know, you know!' The effect of that upon Arthur Clennam was
    to make him repeat his inquiry in exactly the same words and tone
    as before. The effect of that upon young Barnacle was to make him a
    wonderful spectacle of failure and helplessness.

    'Well, I tell you what. Look here. You had better try the Secretarial
    Department,' he said at last, sidling to the bell and ringing it.
    'Jenkinson,' to the mashed potatoes messenger, 'Mr Wobbler!'

    Arthur Clennam, who now felt that he had devoted himself to the storming
    of the Circumlocution Office, and must go through with it, accompanied
    the messenger to another floor of the building, where that functionary
    pointed out Mr Wobbler's room. He entered that apartment, and found two
    gentlemen sitting face to face at a large and easy desk, one of whom was
    polishing a gun-barrel on his pocket-handkerchief, while the other was
    spreading marmalade on bread with a paper-knife.

    'Mr Wobbler?' inquired the suitor.

    Both gentlemen glanced at him, and seemed surprised at his assurance.

    'So he went,' said the gentleman with the gun-barrel, who was an
    extremely deliberate speaker, 'down to his cousin's place, and took the
    Dog with him by rail. Inestimable Dog. Flew at the porter fellow when he
    was put into the dog-box, and flew at the guard when he was taken out.
    He got half-a-dozen fellows into a Barn, and a good supply of Rats, and
    timed the Dog. Finding the Dog able to do it immensely, made the match,
    and heavily backed the Dog. When the match came off, some devil of
    a fellow was bought over, Sir, Dog was made drunk, Dog's master was
    cleaned out.'

    'Mr Wobbler?' inquired the suitor.

    The gentleman who was spreading the marmalade returned, without looking
    up from that occupation, 'What did he call the Dog?'

    'Called him Lovely,' said the other gentleman. 'Said the Dog was the
    perfect picture of the old aunt from whom he had expectations. Found him
    particularly like her when hocussed.'

    'Mr Wobbler?' said the suitor.

    Both gentlemen laughed for some time. The gentleman with the gun-barrel,
    considering it, on inspection, in a satisfactory state, referred it to
    the other; receiving confirmation of his views, he fitted it into its
    place in the case before him, and took out the stock and polished that,
    softly whistling.

    'Mr Wobbler?' said the suitor.

    'What's the matter?' then said Mr Wobbler, with his mouth full.

    'I want to know--' and Arthur Clennam again mechanically set forth what
    he wanted to know.

    'Can't inform you,' observed Mr Wobbler, apparently to his lunch. 'Never
    heard of it. Nothing at all to do with it. Better try Mr Clive, second
    door on the left in the next passage.'

    'Perhaps he will give me the same answer.'

    'Very likely. Don't know anything about it,' said Mr Wobbler.

    The suitor turned away and had left the room, when the gentleman with
    the gun called out 'Mister! Hallo!'

    He looked in again.

    'Shut the door after you. You're letting in a devil of a draught here!'

    A few steps brought him to the second door on the left in the next
    passage. In that room he found three gentlemen; number one doing nothing
    particular, number two doing nothing particular, number three doing
    nothing particular. They seemed, however, to be more directly concerned
    than the others had been in the effective execution of the great
    principle of the office, as there was an awful inner apartment with a
    double door, in which the Circumlocution Sages appeared to be assembled
    in council, and out of which there was an imposing coming of papers,
    and into which there was an imposing going of papers, almost constantly;
wherein another gentleman, number four, was the active instrument.

'I want to know,' said Arthur Clennam,--and again stated his case in the
same barrel-organ way. As number one referred him to number two, and
as number two referred him to number three, he had occasion to state
it three times before they all referred him to number four, to whom he
stated it again.

Number four was a vivacious, well-looking, well-dressed, agreeable
young fellow--he was a Barnacle, but on the more sprightly side of
the family--and he said in an easy way, 'Oh! you had better not bother
yourself about it, I think.'

'Not bother myself about it?'

'No! I recommend you not to bother yourself about it.'

This was such a new point of view that Arthur Clennam found himself at a
loss how to receive it.

'You can if you like. I can give you plenty of forms to fill up. Lots of
'em here. You can have a dozen if you like. But you'll never go on with
it,' said number four.

'Would it be such hopeless work? Excuse me; I am a stranger in England.'

'_I_ don't say it would be hopeless,' returned number four, with a frank
smile. 'I don't express an opinion about that; I only express an opinion
about you. _I_ don't think you'd go on with it. However, of course, you
can do as you like. I suppose there was a failure in the performance of
a contract, or something of that kind, was there?'

'I really don't know.'

'Well! That you can find out. Then you'll find out what Department the
contract was in, and then you'll find out all about it there.'

'I beg your pardon. How shall I find out?'

'Why, you'll--you'll ask till they tell you. Then you'll memorialise
that Department (according to regular forms which you'll find out) for
leave to memorialise this Department. If you get it (which you may after
        a time), that memorial must be entered in that Department, sent to
be registered in this Department, sent back to be signed by that
Department, sent back to be countersigned by this Department, and then
it will begin to be regularly before that Department. You'll find out
when the business passes through each of these stages by asking at both
Departments till they tell you.'

'But surely this is not the way to do the business,' Arthur Clennam
could not help saying.

This airy young Barnacle was quite entertained by his simplicity in
supposing for a moment that it was. This light in hand young Barnacle
knew perfectly that it was not. This touch and go young Barnacle had
'got up' the Department in a private secretaryship, that he might
be ready for any little bit of fat that came to hand; and he fully
understood the Department to be a politico-diplomatic hocus pocus piece
of machinery for the assistance of the nobs in keeping off the
snobs. This dashing young Barnacle, in a word, was likely to become a
statesman, and to make a figure.

'When the business is regularly before that Department, whatever it is,'
pursued this bright young Barnacle, 'then you can watch it from time
to time through that Department. When it comes regularly before this
Department, then you must watch it from time to time through this
Department. We shall have to refer it right and left; and when we refer
it anywhere, then you'll have to look it up. When it comes back to us
at any time, then you had better look _us_ up. When it sticks anywhere,
   you'll have to try to give it a jog. When you write to another
   Department about it, and then to this Department about it, and don't
   hear anything satisfactory about it, why then you had better--keep on
   writing.'

   Arthur Clennam looked very doubtful indeed. 'But I am obliged to you at
   any rate,' said he, 'for your politeness.'

   'Not at all,' replied this engaging young Barnacle. 'Try the thing, and
   see how you like it. It will be in your power to give it up at any time,
   if you don't like it. You had better take a lot of forms away with you.
   Give him a lot of forms!' With which instruction to number two, this
   sparkling young Barnacle took a fresh handful of papers from numbers one
   and three, and carried them into the sanctuary to offer to the presiding
   Idol of the Circumlocution Office.

   Arthur Clennam put his forms in his pocket gloomily enough, and went
   his way down the long stone passage and the long stone staircase. He had
   come to the swing doors leading into the street, and was waiting, not
   over patiently, for two people who were between him and them to pass out
   and let him follow, when the voice of one of them struck familiarly on
   his ear. He looked at the speaker and recognised Mr Meagles. Mr Meagles
   was very red in the face--redder than travel could have made him--and
   collaring a short man who was with him, said, 'come out, you rascal,
   come Out!'

   It was such an unexpected hearing, and it was also such an unexpected
   sight to see Mr Meagles burst the swing doors open, and emerge into the
   street with the short man, who was of an unoffending appearance, that
   Clennam stood still for the moment exchanging looks of surprise with the
   porter. He followed, however, quickly; and saw Mr Meagles going down
   the street with his enemy at his side. He soon came up with his old
   travelling companion, and touched him on the back. The choleric face
   which Mr Meagles turned upon him smoothed when he saw who it was, and he
   put out his friendly hand.

   'How are you?' said Mr Meagles. 'How d'ye _do?_ I have only just come over
   from abroad. I am glad to see you.'

   'And I am rejoiced to see you.'

   'Thank'ee. Thank'ee!'

   'Mrs Meagles and your daughter--?'

   'Are as well as possible,' said Mr Meagles. 'I only wish you had come
   upon me in a more prepossessing condition as to coolness.'

   Though it was anything but a hot day, Mr Meagles was in a heated state
   that attracted the attention of the passersby; more particularly as
   he leaned his back against a railing, took off his hat and cravat, and
   heartily rubbed his steaming head and face, and his reddened ears and
   neck, without the least regard for public opinion.

   'Whew!' said Mr Meagles, dressing again. 'That's comfortable. Now I am
   cooler.'

   'You have been ruffled, Mr Meagles. What is the matter?'

   'Wait a bit, and I'll tell you. Have you leisure for a turn in the
   Park?'

   'As much as you please.'

   'Come along then. Ah! you may well look at him.' He happened to have
   turned his eyes towards the offender whom Mr Meagles had so angrily
   collared. 'He's something to look at, that fellow is.'

   He was not much to look at, either in point of size or in point of
   dress; being merely a short, square, practical looking man, whose hair
   had turned grey, and in whose face and forehead there were deep lines of
   cogitation, which looked as though they were carved in hard wood. He
   was dressed in decent black, a little rusty, and had the appearance of
   a sagacious master in some handicraft. He had a spectacle-case in his
   hand, which he turned over and over while he was thus in question,
   with a certain free use of the thumb that is never seen but in a hand
   accustomed to tools.

   'You keep with us,' said Mr Meagles, in a threatening kind of Way, 'and
   I'll introduce you presently. Now then!'

   Clennam wondered within himself, as they took the nearest way to the
   Park, what this unknown (who complied in the gentlest manner) could have
   been doing. His appearance did not at all justify the suspicion that he
   had been detected in designs on Mr Meagles's pocket-handkerchief; nor
   had he any appearance of being quarrelsome or violent. He was a quiet,
   plain, steady man; made no attempt to escape; and seemed a little
   depressed, but neither ashamed nor repentant. If he were a criminal
   offender, he must surely be an incorrigible hypocrite; and if he were no
   offender, why should Mr Meagles have collared him in the Circumlocution
   Office? He perceived that the man was not a difficulty in his own
   mind alone, but in Mr Meagles's too; for such conversation as they had
   together on the short way to the Park was by no means well sustained,
   and Mr Meagles's eye always wandered back to the man, even when he spoke
   of something very different.

   At length they being among the trees, Mr Meagles stopped short, and
   said:

   'Mr Clennam, will you do me the favour to look at this man? His name
   is Doyce, Daniel Doyce. You wouldn't suppose this man to be a notorious
   rascal; would you?'

   'I certainly should not.' It was really a disconcerting question, with
   the man there.

   'No. You would not. I know you would not. You wouldn't suppose him to be
   a public offender; would you?'

   'No.'

   'No. But he is. He is a public offender. What has he been guilty of?
   Murder, manslaughter, arson, forgery, swindling, house-breaking, highway
   robbery, larceny, conspiracy, fraud? Which should you say, now?'

   'I should say,' returned Arthur Clennam, observing a faint smile in
   Daniel Doyce's face, 'not one of them.'

   'You are right,' said Mr Meagles. 'But he has been ingenious, and he has
   been trying to turn his ingenuity to his country's service. That makes
   him a public offender directly, sir.'

   Arthur looked at the man himself, who only shook his head.

   'This Doyce,' said Mr Meagles, 'is a smith and engineer. He is not in a
    large way, but he is well known as a very ingenious man. A dozen years
ago, he perfects an invention (involving a very curious secret process)
    of great importance to his country and his fellow-creatures. I won't say
    how much money it cost him, or how many years of his life he had been
    about it, but he brought it to perfection a dozen years ago. Wasn't it a
    dozen?' said Mr Meagles, addressing Doyce. 'He is the most exasperating
    man in the world; he never complains!'

    'Yes. Rather better than twelve years ago.'

    'Rather better?' said Mr Meagles, 'you mean rather worse. Well, Mr
    Clennam, he addresses himself to the Government. The moment he addresses
    himself to the Government, he becomes a public offender! Sir,' said Mr
    Meagles, in danger of making himself excessively hot again, 'he ceases
    to be an innocent citizen, and becomes a culprit. He is treated from
    that instant as a man who has done some infernal action. He is a man to
    be shirked, put off, brow-beaten, sneered at, handed over by this
    highly-connected young or old gentleman, to that highly-connected young
    or old gentleman, and dodged back again; he is a man with no rights in
    his own time, or his own property; a mere outlaw, whom it is justifiable
    to get rid of anyhow; a man to be worn out by all possible means.'

    It was not so difficult to believe, after the morning's experience, as
    Mr Meagles supposed.

    'Don't stand there, Doyce, turning your spectacle-case over and over,'
    cried Mr Meagles, 'but tell Mr Clennam what you confessed to me.'

    'I undoubtedly was made to feel,' said the inventor, 'as if I had
    committed an offence. In dancing attendance at the various offices, I
    was always treated, more or less, as if it was a very bad offence. I
    have frequently found it necessary to reflect, for my own self-support,
    that I really had not done anything to bring myself into the Newgate
    Calendar, but only wanted to effect a great saving and a great
    improvement.'

    'There!' said Mr Meagles. 'Judge whether I exaggerate. Now you'll be
    able to believe me when I tell you the rest of the case.'

    With this prelude, Mr Meagles went through the narrative; the
    established narrative, which has become tiresome; the matter-of-course
    narrative which we all know by heart. How, after interminable attendance
    and correspondence, after infinite impertinences, ignorances, and
    insults, my lords made a Minute, number three thousand four hundred
    and seventy-two, allowing the culprit to make certain trials of his
    invention at his own expense. How the trials were made in the presence
    of a board of six, of whom two ancient members were too blind to see it,
    two other ancient members were too deaf to hear it, one other ancient
    member was too lame to get near it, and the final ancient member was too
    pig-headed to look at it. How there were more years; more impertinences,
    ignorances, and insults. How my lords then made a Minute, number five
    thousand one hundred and three, whereby they resigned the business to
    the Circumlocution Office. How the Circumlocution Office, in course of
    time, took up the business as if it were a bran new thing of yesterday,
    which had never been heard of before; muddled the business, addled the
    business, tossed the business in a wet blanket. How the impertinences,
    ignorances, and insults went through the multiplication table. How there
    was a reference of the invention to three Barnacles and a Stiltstalking,
    who knew nothing about it; into whose heads nothing could be hammered
    about it; who got bored about it, and reported physical impossibilities
    about it. How the Circumlocution Office, in a Minute, number eight
    thousand seven hundred and forty, 'saw no reason to reverse the decision
    at which my lords had arrived.' How the Circumlocution Office, being
    reminded that my lords had arrived at no decision, shelved the business.
    How there had been a final interview with the head of the Circumlocution
    Office that very morning, and how the Brazen Head had spoken, and had
    been, upon the whole, and under all the circumstances, and looking at it
    from the various points of view, of opinion that one of two courses was
    to be pursued in respect of the business: that was to say, either to
    leave it alone for evermore, or to begin it all over again.

    'Upon which,' said Mr Meagles, 'as a practical man, I then and there, in
    that presence, took Doyce by the collar, and told him it was plain to
    me that he was an infamous rascal and treasonable disturber of the
    government peace, and took him away. I brought him out of the office
    door by the collar, that the very porter might know I was a practical
    man who appreciated the official estimate of such characters; and here
    we are!'

    If that airy young Barnacle had been there, he would have frankly told
    them perhaps that the Circumlocution Office had achieved its function.
    That what the Barnacles had to do, was to stick on to the national ship
    as long as they could. That to trim the ship, lighten the ship, clean
    the ship, would be to knock them off; that they could but be knocked off
    once; and that if the ship went down with them yet sticking to it, that
    was the ship's look out, and not theirs.

    'There!' said Mr Meagles, 'now you know all about Doyce. Except, which I
    own does not improve my state of mind, that even now you don't hear him
    complain.'

    'You must have great patience,' said Arthur Clennam, looking at him with
    some wonder, 'great forbearance.'

    'No,' he returned, 'I don't know that I have more than another man.'

    'By the Lord, you have more than I have, though!' cried Mr Meagles.

    Doyce smiled, as he said to Clennam, 'You see, my experience of these
    things does not begin with myself. It has been in my way to know a
    little about them from time to time. Mine is not a particular case. I am
    not worse used than a hundred others who have put themselves in the same
    position--than all the others, I was going to say.'

    'I don't know that I should find that a consolation, if it were my case;
    but I am very glad that you do.'

    'Understand me! I don't say,' he replied in his steady, planning
    way, and looking into the distance before him as if his grey eye were
    measuring it, 'that it's recompense for a man's toil and hope; but it's
    a certain sort of relief to know that I might have counted on this.'

    He spoke in that quiet deliberate manner, and in that undertone, which
    is often observable in mechanics who consider and adjust with great
    nicety. It belonged to him like his suppleness of thumb, or his peculiar
    way of tilting up his hat at the back every now and then, as if he were
    contemplating some half-finished work of his hand and thinking about it.

    'Disappointed?' he went on, as he walked between them under the trees.
    'Yes. No doubt I am disappointed. Hurt? Yes. No doubt I am hurt. That's
    only natural. But what I mean when I say that people who put themselves
    in the same position are mostly used in the same way--'

    'In England,' said Mr Meagles.

    'Oh! of course I mean in England. When they take their inventions into
    foreign countries, that's quite different. And that's the reason why so
    many go there.'

    Mr Meagles very hot indeed again.

    'What I mean is, that however this comes to be the regular way of our
    government, it is its regular way. Have you ever heard of any projector
    or inventor who failed to find it all but inaccessible, and whom it did
    not discourage and ill-treat?'

    'I cannot say that I ever have.'

    'Have you ever known it to be beforehand in the adoption of any useful
    thing? Ever known it to set an example of any useful kind?'

    'I am a good deal older than my friend here,' said Mr Meagles, 'and I'll
    answer that. Never.'

    'But we all three have known, I expect,' said the inventor, 'a pretty
    many cases of its fixed determination to be miles upon miles, and years
    upon years, behind the rest of us; and of its being found out persisting
    in the use of things long superseded, even after the better things were
    well known and generally taken up?'

    They all agreed upon that.

    'Well then,' said Doyce, with a sigh, 'as I know what such a metal will
    do at such a temperature, and such a body under such a pressure, so I
    may know (if I will only consider), how these great lords and gentlemen
    will certainly deal with such a matter as mine. I have no right to be
    surprised, with a head upon my shoulders, and memory in it, that I fall
    into the ranks with all who came before me. I ought to have let it
    alone. I have had warning enough, I am sure.'

    With that he put up his spectacle-case, and said to Arthur, 'If I don't
    complain, Mr Clennam, I can feel gratitude; and I assure you that I
    feel it towards our mutual friend. Many's the day, and many's the way in
    which he has backed me.'

    'Stuff and nonsense,' said Mr Meagles.

    Arthur could not but glance at Daniel Doyce in the ensuing silence.
    Though it was evidently in the grain of his character, and of his
    respect for his own case, that he should abstain from idle murmuring,
    it was evident that he had grown the older, the sterner, and the poorer,
    for his long endeavour. He could not but think what a blessed thing
    it would have been for this man, if he had taken a lesson from the
    gentlemen who were so kind as to take a nation's affairs in charge, and
    had learnt How not to do it.

    Mr Meagles was hot and despondent for about five minutes, and then began
    to cool and clear up.

    'Come, come!' said he. 'We shall not make this the better by being grim.
    Where do you think of going, Dan?'

    'I shall go back to the factory,' said Dan.

    'Why then, we'll all go back to the factory, or walk in that direction,'
    returned Mr Meagles cheerfully. 'Mr Clennam won't be deterred by its
    being in Bleeding Heart Yard.'

    'Bleeding Heart Yard?' said Clennam. 'I want to go there.'

    'So much the better,' cried Mr Meagles. 'Come along!'

    As they went along, certainly one of the party, and probably more than
    one, thought that Bleeding Heart Yard was no inappropriate destination
    for a man who had been in official correspondence with my lords and the
    Barnacles--and perhaps had a misgiving also that Britannia herself might
    come to look for lodgings in Bleeding Heart Yard some ugly day or other,
    if she over-did the Circumlocution Office.



A late, dull autumn night was closing in upon the river Saone. The
stream, like a sullied looking-glass in a gloomy place, reflected the
clouds heavily; and the low banks leaned over here and there, as if they
were half curious, and half afraid, to see their darkening pictures in
the water. The flat expanse of country about Chalons lay a long heavy
streak, occasionally made a little ragged by a row of poplar trees
against the wrathful sunset. On the banks of the river Saone it was wet,
        depressing, solitary; and the night deepened fast.

        One man slowly moving on towards Chalons was the only visible figure in
        the landscape. Cain might have looked as lonely and avoided. With an old
        sheepskin knapsack at his back, and a rough, unbarked stick cut out of
        some wood in his hand; miry, footsore, his shoes and gaiters trodden
        out, his hair and beard untrimmed; the cloak he carried over his
        shoulder, and the clothes he wore, sodden with wet; limping along in
        pain and difficulty; he looked as if the clouds were hurrying from him,
        as if the wail of the wind and the shuddering of the grass were directed
        against him, as if the low mysterious plashing of the water murmured at
        him, as if the fitful autumn night were disturbed by him.

        He glanced here, and he glanced there, sullenly but shrinkingly; and
        sometimes stopped and turned about, and looked all round him. Then he
        limped on again, toiling and muttering.

        'To the devil with this plain that has no end! To the devil with these
        stones that cut like knives! To the devil with this dismal darkness,
        wrapping itself about one with a chill! I hate you!'

        And he would have visited his hatred upon it all with the scowl he threw
        about him, if he could. He trudged a little further; and looking into
        the distance before him, stopped again.

        'I, hungry, thirsty, weary. You, imbeciles, where the lights are yonder,
        eating and drinking, and warming yourselves at fires! I wish I had the
        sacking of your town; I would repay you, my children!'

        But the teeth he set at the town, and the hand he shook at the town,
        brought the town no nearer; and the man was yet hungrier, and thirstier,
        and wearier, when his feet were on its jagged pavement, and he stood
        looking about him.

        There was the hotel with its gateway, and its savoury smell of cooking;
        there was the cafe with its bright windows, and its rattling of
        dominoes; there was the dyer's with its strips of red cloth on the
        doorposts; there was the silversmith's with its earrings, and its
        offerings for altars; there was the tobacco dealer's with its lively
        group of soldier customers coming out pipe in mouth; there were the bad
        odours of the town, and the rain and the refuse in the kennels, and
        the faint lamps slung across the road, and the huge Diligence, and its
        mountain of luggage, and its six grey horses with their tails tied up,
        getting under weigh at the coach office. But no small cabaret for a
        straitened traveller being within sight, he had to seek one round the
        dark corner, where the cabbage leaves lay thickest, trodden about the
        public cistern at which women had not yet left off drawing water. There,
        in the back street he found one, the Break of Day. The curtained windows
        clouded the Break of Day, but it seemed light and warm, and it announced
        in legible inscriptions with appropriate pictorial embellishment
        of billiard cue and ball, that at the Break of Day one could play
        billiards; that there one could find meat, drink, and lodgings, whether
        one came on horseback, or came on foot; and that it kept good wines,
        liqueurs, and brandy. The man turned the handle of the Break of Day
        door, and limped in.

        He touched his discoloured slouched hat, as he came in at the door, to
        a few men who occupied the room. Two were playing dominoes at one of the
        little tables; three or four were seated round the stove, conversing
        as they smoked; the billiard-table in the centre was left alone for the
        time; the landlady of the Daybreak sat behind her little counter among
        her cloudy bottles of syrups, baskets of cakes, and leaden drainage for
        glasses, working at her needle.

        Making his way to an empty little table in a corner of the room behind
        the stove, he put down his knapsack and his cloak upon the ground. As
        he raised his head from stooping to do so, he found the landlady beside
        him.

        'One can lodge here to-night, madame?'

        'Perfectly!' said the landlady in a high, sing-song, cheery voice.

        'Good. One can dine--sup--what you please to call it?'

        'Ah, perfectly!' cried the landlady as before.

        'Dispatch then, madame, if you please. Something to eat, as quickly as
        you can; and some wine at once. I am exhausted.'

        'It is very bad weather, monsieur,' said the landlady.

        'Cursed weather.'

        'And a very long road.'

        'A cursed road.'

        His hoarse voice failed him, and he rested his head upon his hands until
        a bottle of wine was brought from the counter. Having filled and emptied
        his little tumbler twice, and having broken off an end from the great
        loaf that was set before him with his cloth and napkin, soup-plate,
        salt, pepper, and oil, he rested his back against the corner of the
        wall, made a couch of the bench on which he sat, and began to chew
        crust, until such time as his repast should be ready.

        There had been that momentary interruption of the talk about the stove,
        and that temporary inattention to and distraction from one another,
        which is usually inseparable in such a company from the arrival of a
        stranger. It had passed over by this time; and the men had done glancing
        at him, and were talking again.

        'That's the true reason,' said one of them, bringing a story he had
        been telling, to a close, 'that's the true reason why they said that the
        devil was let loose.' The speaker was the tall Swiss belonging to the
        church, and he brought something of the authority of the church into the
        discussion--especially as the devil was in question.

        The landlady having given her directions for the new guest's
        entertainment to her husband, who acted as cook to the Break of Day, had
        resumed her needlework behind her counter. She was a smart, neat, bright
        little woman, with a good deal of cap and a good deal of stocking, and
        she struck into the conversation with several laughing nods of her head,
        but without looking up from her work.

        'Ah Heaven, then,' said she. 'When the boat came up from Lyons, and
        brought the news that the devil was actually let loose at Marseilles,
        some fly-catchers swallowed it. But I? No, not I.'

        'Madame, you are always right,' returned the tall Swiss. 'Doubtless you
        were enraged against that man, madame?'

        'Ay, yes, then!' cried the landlady, raising her eyes from her work,
        opening them very wide, and tossing her head on one side. 'Naturally,
        yes.'

        'He was a bad subject.'

        'He was a wicked wretch,' said the landlady, 'and well merited what he
        had the good fortune to escape. So much the worse.'

        'Stay, madame! Let us see,' returned the Swiss, argumentatively turning
        his cigar between his lips. 'It may have been his unfortunate destiny.
        He may have been the child of circumstances. It is always possible that
        he had, and has, good in him if one did but know how to find it out.
        Philosophical philanthropy teaches--'

        The rest of the little knot about the stove murmured an objection to
        the introduction of that threatening expression. Even the two players
        at dominoes glanced up from their game, as if to protest against
        philosophical philanthropy being brought by name into the Break of Day.

        'Hold there, you and your philanthropy,' cried the smiling landlady,
        nodding her head more than ever. 'Listen then. I am a woman, I. I know
        nothing of philosophical philanthropy. But I know what I have seen, and
        what I have looked in the face in this world here, where I find myself.
        And I tell you this, my friend, that there are people (men and women
                both, unfortunately) who have no good in them--none. That there are
        people whom it is necessary to detest without compromise. That there are
        people who must be dealt with as enemies of the human race. That there
        are people who have no human heart, and who must be crushed like savage
        beasts and cleared out of the way. They are but few, I hope; but I have
        seen (in this world here where I find myself, and even at the little
                Break of Day) that there are such people. And I do not doubt that this
        man--whatever they call him, I forget his name--is one of them.'

        The landlady's lively speech was received with greater favour at
        the Break of Day, than it would have elicited from certain amiable
        whitewashers of the class she so unreasonably objected to, nearer Great
        Britain.

        'My faith! If your philosophical philanthropy,' said the landlady,
        putting down her work, and rising to take the stranger's soup from her
        husband, who appeared with it at a side door, 'puts anybody at the mercy
        of such people by holding terms with them at all, in words or deeds, or
        both, take it away from the Break of Day, for it isn't worth a sou.'

        As she placed the soup before the guest, who changed his attitude to a
        sitting one, he looked her full in the face, and his moustache went up
        under his nose, and his nose came down over his moustache.

        'Well!' said the previous speaker, 'let us come back to our subject.
        Leaving all that aside, gentlemen, it was because the man was acquitted
        on his trial that people said at Marseilles that the devil was let
        loose. That was how the phrase began to circulate, and what it meant;
        nothing more.'

        'How do they call him?' said the landlady. 'Biraud, is it not?'

        'Rigaud, madame,' returned the tall Swiss.

        'Rigaud! To be sure.'

        The traveller's soup was succeeded by a dish of meat, and that by a dish
        of vegetables. He ate all that was placed before him, emptied his bottle
        of wine, called for a glass of rum, and smoked his cigarette with
        his cup of coffee. As he became refreshed, he became overbearing; and
        patronised the company at the Daybreak in certain small talk at which he
        assisted, as if his condition were far above his appearance.

        The company might have had other engagements, or they might have felt
        their inferiority, but in any case they dispersed by degrees, and not
        being replaced by other company, left their new patron in possession of
        the Break of Day. The landlord was clinking about in his kitchen; the
        landlady was quiet at her work; and the refreshed traveller sat smoking
        by the stove, warming his ragged feet.

        'Pardon me, madame--that Biraud.'

        'Rigaud, monsieur.'

        'Rigaud. Pardon me again--has contracted your displeasure, how?'

        The landlady, who had been at one moment thinking within herself that
        this was a handsome man, at another moment that this was an ill-looking
        man, observed the nose coming down and the moustache going up, and
        strongly inclined to the latter decision. Rigaud was a criminal, she
        said, who had killed his wife.

        'Ay, ay? Death of my life, that's a criminal indeed. But how do you know
        it?'

        'All the world knows it.'

        'Hah! And yet he escaped justice?'

        'Monsieur, the law could not prove it against him to its satisfaction.
        So the law says. Nevertheless, all the world knows he did it. The people
        knew it so well, that they tried to tear him to pieces.'

        'Being all in perfect accord with their own wives?' said the guest. 'Haha!'

        The landlady of the Break of Day looked at him again, and felt almost
        confirmed in her last decision. He had a fine hand, though, and he
        turned it with a great show. She began once more to think that he was
        not ill-looking after all.

        'Did you mention, madame--or was it mentioned among the gentlemen--what
        became of him?'

        The landlady shook her head; it being the first conversational stage at
        which her vivacious earnestness had ceased to nod it, keeping time to what
        she said. It had been mentioned at the Daybreak, she remarked, on the
        authority of the journals, that he had been kept in prison for his own
        safety. However that might be, he had escaped his deserts; so much the
        worse.

        The guest sat looking at her as he smoked out his final cigarette, and
        as she sat with her head bent over her work, with an expression that
        might have resolved her doubts, and brought her to a lasting conclusion
        on the subject of his good or bad looks if she had seen it. When she did
        look up, the expression was not there. The hand was smoothing his shaggy
        moustache.

        'May one ask to be shown to bed, madame?'

        Very willingly, monsieur. Hola, my husband! My husband would conduct him
        up-stairs. There was one traveller there, asleep, who had gone to bed
        very early indeed, being overpowered by fatigue; but it was a large
        chamber with two beds in it, and space enough for twenty. This the
        landlady of the Break of Day chirpingly explained, calling between
        whiles, 'Hola, my husband!' out at the side door.

        My husband answered at length, 'It is I, my wife!' and presenting
        himself in his cook's cap, lighted the traveller up a steep and narrow
        staircase; the traveller carrying his own cloak and knapsack, and
        bidding the landlady good night with a complimentary reference to the
        pleasure of seeing her again to-morrow. It was a large room, with a
        rough splintery floor, unplastered rafters overhead, and two bedsteads
        on opposite sides. Here 'my husband' put down the candle he carried, and
        with a sidelong look at his guest stooping over his knapsack, gruffly
        gave him the instruction, 'The bed to the right!' and left him to his
        repose. The landlord, whether he was a good or a bad physiognomist, had
        fully made up his mind that the guest was an ill-looking fellow.

        The guest looked contemptuously at the clean coarse bedding prepared for
        him, and, sitting down on the rush chair at the bedside, drew his money
        out of his pocket, and told it over in his hand. 'One must eat,' he
        muttered to himself, 'but by Heaven I must eat at the cost of some other
        man to-morrow!'

        As he sat pondering, and mechanically weighing his money in his palm,
        the deep breathing of the traveller in the other bed fell so regularly
        upon his hearing that it attracted his eyes in that direction. The man
        was covered up warm, and had drawn the white curtain at his head, so
        that he could be only heard, not seen. But the deep regular breathing,
        still going on while the other was taking off his worn shoes and
        gaiters, and still continuing when he had laid aside his coat and
        cravat, became at length a strong provocative to curiosity, and
        incentive to get a glimpse of the sleeper's face.

        The waking traveller, therefore, stole a little nearer, and yet a little
        nearer, and a little nearer to the sleeping traveller's bed, until he
        stood close beside it. Even then he could not see his face, for he had
        drawn the sheet over it. The regular breathing still continuing, he put
        his smooth white hand (such a treacherous hand it looked, as it went
                creeping from him!) to the sheet, and gently lifted it away.

        'Death of my soul!' he whispered, falling back, 'here's Cavalletto!'

        The little Italian, previously influenced in his sleep, perhaps, by the
        stealthy presence at his bedside, stopped in his regular breathing, and
        with a long deep respiration opened his eyes. At first they were not
        awake, though open. He lay for some seconds looking placidly at his
        old prison companion, and then, all at once, with a cry of surprise and
        alarm, sprang out of bed.

        'Hush! What's the matter? Keep quiet! It's I. You know me?' cried the
        other, in a suppressed voice.

        But John Baptist, widely staring, muttering a number of invocations
        and ejaculations, tremblingly backing into a corner, slipping on
        his trousers, and tying his coat by the two sleeves round his neck,
        manifested an unmistakable desire to escape by the door rather than
        renew the acquaintance. Seeing this, his old prison comrade fell back
        upon the door, and set his shoulders against it.

        'Cavalletto! Wake, boy! Rub your eyes and look at me. Not the name you
        used to call me--don't use that--Lagnier, say Lagnier!'

        John Baptist, staring at him with eyes opened to their utmost width,
        made a number of those national, backhanded shakes of the right
        forefinger in the air, as if he were resolved on negativing beforehand
        everything that the other could possibly advance during the whole term
        of his life.

        'Cavalletto! Give me your hand. You know Lagnier, the gentleman. Touch
        the hand of a gentleman!'

        Submitting himself to the old tone of condescending authority, John
        Baptist, not at all steady on his legs as yet, advanced and put his
        hand in his patron's. Monsieur Lagnier laughed; and having given it a
        squeeze, tossed it up and let it go.

        'Then you were--' faltered John Baptist.

        'Not shaved? No. See here!' cried Lagnier, giving his head a twirl; 'as
        tight on as your own.'

        John Baptist, with a slight shiver, looked all round the room as if to
        recall where he was. His patron took that opportunity of turning the key
        in the door, and then sat down upon his bed.

        'Look!' he said, holding up his shoes and gaiters. 'That's a poor trim
        for a gentleman, you'll say. No matter, you shall see how soon I'll mend
        it. Come and sit down. Take your old place!'

        John Baptist, looking anything but reassured, sat down on the floor at
        the bedside, keeping his eyes upon his patron all the time.

        'That's well!' cried Lagnier. 'Now we might be in the old infernal hole
        again, hey? How long have you been out?'

        'Two days after you, my master.'

        'How do you come here?'

        'I was cautioned not to stay there, and so I left the town at once,
        and since then I have changed about. I have been doing odds and ends at
        Avignon, at Pont Esprit, at Lyons; upon the Rhone, upon the Saone.' As
        he spoke, he rapidly mapped the places out with his sunburnt hand upon
        the floor.

        'And where are you going?'

        'Going, my master?'

        'Ay!'

        John Baptist seemed to desire to evade the question without knowing how.
        'By Bacchus!' he said at last, as if he were forced to the admission, 'I
        have sometimes had a thought of going to Paris, and perhaps to England.'

        'Cavalletto. This is in confidence. I also am going to Paris and perhaps
        to England. We'll go together.'

        The little man nodded his head, and showed his teeth; and yet seemed not
        quite convinced that it was a surpassingly desirable arrangement.

        'We'll go together,' repeated Lagnier. 'You shall see how soon I will
        force myself to be recognised as a gentleman, and you shall profit by
        it. It is agreed? Are we one?'

        'Oh, surely, surely!' said the little man.

        'Then you shall hear before I sleep--and in six words, for I want
        sleep--how I appear before you, I, Lagnier. Remember that. Not the
        other.'

        'Altro, altro! Not Ri----' Before John Baptist could finish the name, his
        comrade had got his hand under his chin and fiercely shut up his mouth.

        'Death! what are you doing? Do you want me to be trampled upon and
        stoned? Do _you_ want to be trampled upon and stoned? You would be. You
        don't imagine that they would set upon me, and let my prison chum go?
        Don't think it!'

        There was an expression in his face as he released his grip of his
        friend's jaw, from which his friend inferred that if the course of
        events really came to any stoning and trampling, Monsieur Lagnier would
        so distinguish him with his notice as to ensure his having his full
        share of it. He remembered what a cosmopolitan gentleman Monsieur
        Lagnier was, and how few weak distinctions he made.

        'I am a man,' said Monsieur Lagnier, 'whom society has deeply wronged
        since you last saw me. You know that I am sensitive and brave, and that
        it is my character to govern. How has society respected those qualities
        in me? I have been shrieked at through the streets. I have been guarded
        through the streets against men, and especially women, running at me
        armed with any weapons they could lay their hands on. I have lain in
        prison for security, with the place of my confinement kept a secret,
        lest I should be torn out of it and felled by a hundred blows. I have
        been carted out of Marseilles in the dead of night, and carried leagues
        away from it packed in straw. It has not been safe for me to go near my
        house; and, with a beggar's pittance in my pocket, I have walked through
        vile mud and weather ever since, until my feet are crippled--look at
        them! Such are the humiliations that society has inflicted upon me,
        possessing the qualities I have mentioned, and which you know me to
        possess. But society shall pay for it.'

        All this he said in his companion's ear, and with his hand before his
        lips.

        'Even here,' he went on in the same way, 'even in this mean
        drinking-shop, society pursues me. Madame defames me, and her guests
        defame me. I, too, a gentleman with manners and accomplishments
        to strike them dead! But the wrongs society has heaped upon me are
        treasured in this breast.'

        To all of which John Baptist, listening attentively to the suppressed
        hoarse voice, said from time to time, 'Surely, surely!' tossing his
        head and shutting his eyes, as if there were the clearest case against
        society that perfect candour could make out.

        'Put my shoes there,' continued Lagnier. 'Hang my cloak to dry there
        by the door. Take my hat.' He obeyed each instruction, as it was given.
        'And this is the bed to which society consigns me, is it? Hah. _Very_
        well!'

        As he stretched out his length upon it, with a ragged handkerchief
        bound round his wicked head, and only his wicked head showing above the
        bedclothes, John Baptist was rather strongly reminded of what had so
        very nearly happened to prevent the moustache from any more going up as
        it did, and the nose from any more coming down as it did.

        'Shaken out of destiny's dice-box again into your company, eh? By
        Heaven! So much the better for you. You'll profit by it. I shall need a
        long rest. Let me sleep in the morning.'

        John Baptist replied that he should sleep as long as he would, and
        wishing him a happy night, put out the candle. One might have supposed
        that the next proceeding of the Italian would have been to undress;
        but he did exactly the reverse, and dressed himself from head to foot,
        saving his shoes. When he had so done, he lay down upon his bed with
        some of its coverings over him, and his coat still tied round his neck,
        to get through the night.

        When he started up, the Godfather Break of Day was peeping at its
        namesake. He rose, took his shoes in his hand, turned the key in the
        door with great caution, and crept downstairs. Nothing was astir there
        but the smell of coffee, wine, tobacco, and syrups; and madame's little
        counter looked ghastly enough. But he had paid madame his little note
        at it over night, and wanted to see nobody--wanted nothing but to get on
        his shoes and his knapsack, open the door, and run away.

        He prospered in his object. No movement or voice was heard when he
        opened the door; no wicked head tied up in a ragged handkerchief looked
        out of the upper window. When the sun had raised his full disc above the
        flat line of the horizon, and was striking fire out of the long muddy
        vista of paved road with its weary avenue of little trees, a black speck
        moved along the road and splashed among the flaming pools of rain-water,
        which black speck was John Baptist Cavalletto running away from his
        patron.




In London itself, though in the old rustic road towards a suburb of note
where in the days of William Shakespeare, author and stage-player, there
were Royal hunting-seats--howbeit no sport is left there now but for
hunters of men--Bleeding Heart Yard was to be found; a place much
changed in feature and in fortune, yet with some relish of ancient
greatness about it. Two or three mighty stacks of chimneys, and a few
large dark rooms which had escaped being walled and subdivided out of
the recognition of their old proportions, gave the Yard a character.
It was inhabited by poor people, who set up their rest among its faded
glories, as Arabs of the desert pitch their tents among the fallen
stones of the Pyramids; but there was a family sentimental feeling
prevalent in the Yard, that it had a character.

As if the aspiring city had become puffed up in the very ground on which
it stood, the ground had so risen about Bleeding Heart Yard that you
got into it down a flight of steps which formed no part of the original
approach, and got out of it by a low gateway into a maze of shabby
streets, which went about and about, tortuously ascending to the level
again. At this end of the Yard and over the gateway, was the factory of
Daniel Doyce, often heavily beating like a bleeding heart of iron,
       with the clink of metal upon metal.

       The opinion of the Yard was divided respecting the derivation of its
       name. The more practical of its inmates abided by the tradition of a
       murder; the gentler and more imaginative inhabitants, including the
       whole of the tender sex, were loyal to the legend of a young lady of
       former times closely imprisoned in her chamber by a cruel father for
       remaining true to her own true love, and refusing to marry the suitor he
       chose for her. The legend related how that the young lady used to be
       seen up at her window behind the bars, murmuring a love-lorn song of
       which the burden was, 'Bleeding Heart, Bleeding Heart, bleeding away,'
       until she died. It was objected by the murderous party that this Refrain
       was notoriously the invention of a tambour-worker, a spinster and
       romantic, still lodging in the Yard. But, forasmuch as all favourite
       legends must be associated with the affections, and as many more people
       fall in love than commit murder--which it may be hoped, howsoever bad we
       are, will continue until the end of the world to be the dispensation
       under which we shall live--the Bleeding Heart, Bleeding Heart, bleeding
       away story, carried the day by a great majority. Neither party would
       listen to the antiquaries who delivered learned lectures in the
       neighbourhood, showing the Bleeding Heart to have been the heraldic
       cognisance of the old family to whom the property had once belonged.
       And, considering that the hour-glass they turned from year to year was
       filled with the earthiest and coarsest sand, the Bleeding Heart Yarders
       had reason enough for objecting to be despoiled of the one little golden
       grain of poetry that sparkled in it.

       Down in to the Yard, by way of the steps, came Daniel Doyce, Mr Meagles,
       and Clennam. Passing along the Yard, and between the open doors on
       either hand, all abundantly garnished with light children nursing heavy
       ones, they arrived at its opposite boundary, the gateway. Here Arthur
       Clennam stopped to look about him for the domicile of Plornish,
       plasterer, whose name, according to the custom of Londoners, Daniel
       Doyce had never seen or heard of to that hour.

       It was plain enough, nevertheless, as Little Dorrit had said; over a
       lime-splashed gateway in the corner, within which Plornish kept a ladder
       and a barrel or two. The last house in Bleeding Heart Yard which she
       had described as his place of habitation, was a large house, let off to
       various tenants; but Plornish ingeniously hinted that he lived in the
       parlour, by means of a painted hand under his name, the forefinger of
       which hand (on which the artist had depicted a ring and a most elaborate
               nail of the genteelest form) referred all inquirers to that apartment.

       Parting from his companions, after arranging another meeting with
       Mr Meagles, Clennam went alone into the entry, and knocked with his
       knuckles at the parlour-door. It was opened presently by a woman with
       a child in her arms, whose unoccupied hand was hastily rearranging the
       upper part of her dress. This was Mrs Plornish, and this maternal
       action was the action of Mrs Plornish during a large part of her waking
       existence.

       Was Mr Plornish at home? 'Well, sir,' said Mrs Plornish, a civil woman,
       'not to deceive you, he's gone to look for a job.'

       'Not to deceive you' was a method of speech with Mrs Plornish. She would
       deceive you, under any circumstances, as little as might be; but she had
       a trick of answering in this provisional form.

       'Do you think he will be back soon, if I wait for him?'

       'I have been expecting him,' said Mrs Plornish, 'this half an hour, at
       any minute of time. Walk in, sir.'

       Arthur entered the rather dark and close parlour (though it was lofty too),
       and sat down in the chair she placed for him.

       'Not to deceive you, sir, I notice it,' said Mrs Plornish, 'and I take
       it kind of you.'

       He was at a loss to understand what she meant; and by expressing as much
       in his looks, elicited her explanation.

       'It ain't many that comes into a poor place, that deems it worth their
       while to move their hats,' said Mrs Plornish. 'But people think more of
       it than people think.'

       Clennam returned, with an uncomfortable feeling in so very slight a
       courtesy being unusual, Was that all! And stooping down to pinch the
       cheek of another young child who was sitting on the floor, staring at
       him, asked Mrs Plornish how old that fine boy was?

       'Four year just turned, sir,' said Mrs Plornish. 'He _is_ a fine little
       fellow, ain't he, sir? But this one is rather sickly.' She tenderly
       hushed the baby in her arms, as she said it. 'You wouldn't mind my
       asking if it happened to be a job as you was come about, sir, would
       you?' asked Mrs Plornish wistfully.

       She asked it so anxiously, that if he had been in possession of any
       kind of tenement, he would have had it plastered a foot deep rather
       than answer No. But he was obliged to answer No; and he saw a shade of
       disappointment on her face, as she checked a sigh, and looked at the
       low fire. Then he saw, also, that Mrs Plornish was a young woman, made
       somewhat slatternly in herself and her belongings by poverty; and so
       dragged at by poverty and the children together, that their united
       forces had already dragged her face into wrinkles.

       'All such things as jobs,' said Mrs Plornish, 'seems to me to have gone
       underground, they do indeed.' (Herein Mrs Plornish limited her remark to
               the plastering trade, and spoke without reference to the Circumlocution
               Office and the Barnacle Family.)

       'Is it so difficult to get work?' asked Arthur Clennam.

       'Plornish finds it so,' she returned. 'He is quite unfortunate. Really
       he is.'

       Really he was. He was one of those many wayfarers on the road of life,
       who seem to be afflicted with supernatural corns, rendering it
       impossible for them to keep up even with their lame competitors. A
       willing, working, soft hearted, not hard-headed fellow, Plornish took
       his fortune as smoothly as could be expected; but it was a rough one. It
       so rarely happened that anybody seemed to want him, it was such an
       exceptional case when his powers were in any request, that his misty
       mind could not make out how it happened. He took it as it came,
       therefore; he tumbled into all kinds of difficulties, and tumbled out of
       them; and, by tumbling through life, got himself considerably bruised.

       'It's not for want of looking after jobs, I am sure,' said Mrs Plornish,
       lifting up her eyebrows, and searching for a solution of the problem
       between the bars of the grate; 'nor yet for want of working at them when
       they are to be got. No one ever heard my husband complain of work.'

       Somehow or other, this was the general misfortune of Bleeding Heart
       Yard. From time to time there were public complaints, pathetically
       going about, of labour being scarce--which certain people seemed to take
       extraordinarily ill, as though they had an absolute right to it on their
       own terms--but Bleeding Heart Yard, though as willing a Yard as any in
       Britain, was never the better for the demand. That high old family, the
       Barnacles, had long been too busy with their great principle to look
       into the matter; and indeed the matter had nothing to do with their
       watchfulness in out-generalling all other high old families except the
       Stiltstalkings.

       While Mrs Plornish spoke in these words of her absent lord, her lord
       returned. A smooth-cheeked, fresh-coloured, sandy-whiskered man of
       thirty. Long in the legs, yielding at the knees, foolish in the face,
       flannel-jacketed, lime-whitened.

       'This is Plornish, sir.'

       'I came,' said Clennam, rising, 'to beg the favour of a little
       conversation with you on the subject of the Dorrit family.'

       Plornish became suspicious. Seemed to scent a creditor. Said, 'Ah, yes.
       Well. He didn't know what satisfaction _he_ could give any gentleman,
       respecting that family. What might it be about, now?'

       'I know you better,' said Clennam, smiling, 'than you suppose.'

       Plornish observed, not smiling in return, And yet he hadn't the pleasure
       of being acquainted with the gentleman, neither.

       'No,' said Arthur, 'I know your kind offices at second hand, but on the
       best authority; through Little Dorrit.--I mean,' he explained, 'Miss
       Dorrit.'

       'Mr Clennam, is it? Oh! I've heard of you, Sir.'

       'And I of you,' said Arthur.

       'Please to sit down again, Sir, and consider yourself welcome.--Why,
       yes,' said Plornish, taking a chair, and lifting the elder child upon
       his knee, that he might have the moral support of speaking to a stranger
       over his head, 'I have been on the wrong side of the Lock myself, and
       in that way we come to know Miss Dorrit. Me and my wife, we are well
       acquainted with Miss Dorrit.'

       'Intimate!' cried Mrs Plornish. Indeed, she was so proud of the
       acquaintance, that she had awakened some bitterness of spirit in the
       Yard by magnifying to an enormous amount the sum for which Miss Dorrit's
       father had become insolvent. The Bleeding Hearts resented her claiming
       to know people of such distinction.

       'It was her father that I got acquainted with first. And through getting
       acquainted with him, you see--why--I got acquainted with her,' said
       Plornish tautologically.

       'I see.'

       'Ah! And there's manners! There's polish! There's a gentleman to have
       run to seed in the Marshalsea jail! Why, perhaps you are not aware,'
       said Plornish, lowering his voice, and speaking with a perverse
       admiration of what he ought to have pitied or despised, 'not aware that
       Miss Dorrit and her sister dursn't let him know that they work for a
       living. No!' said Plornish, looking with a ridiculous triumph first at
       his wife, and then all round the room. 'Dursn't let him know it, they
       dursn't!'

       'Without admiring him for that,' Clennam quietly observed, 'I am very
       sorry for him.' The remark appeared to suggest to Plornish, for the
       first time, that it might not be a very fine trait of character after
       all. He pondered about it for a moment, and gave it up.

       'As to me,' he resumed, 'certainly Mr Dorrit is as affable with me, I
       am sure, as I can possibly expect. Considering the differences and
       distances betwixt us, more so. But it's Miss Dorrit that we were
       speaking of.'

       'True. Pray how did you introduce her at my mother's!'

       Mr Plornish picked a bit of lime out of his whisker, put it between his
       lips, turned it with his tongue like a sugar-plum, considered, found
       himself unequal to the task of lucid explanation, and appealing to his
       wife, said, 'Sally, _you_ may as well mention how it was, old woman.'

       'Miss Dorrit,' said Sally, hushing the baby from side to side, and
       laying her chin upon the little hand as it tried to disarrange the gown
       again, 'came here one afternoon with a bit of writing, telling that
       how she wished for needlework, and asked if it would be considered any
       ill-conwenience in case she was to give her address here.' (Plornish
               repeated, her address here, in a low voice, as if he were making
               responses at church.) 'Me and Plornish says, No, Miss Dorrit, no
       ill-conwenience,' (Plornish repeated, no ill-conwenience,) 'and she
       wrote it in, according. Which then me and Plornish says, Ho Miss
       Dorrit!' (Plornish repeated, Ho Miss Dorrit.) 'Have you thought of
       copying it three or four times, as the way to make it known in more
       places than one? No, says Miss Dorrit, I have not, but I will. She
       copied it out according, on this table, in a sweet writing, and
       Plornish, he took it where he worked, having a job just then,' (Plornish
               repeated job just then,) 'and likewise to the landlord of the Yard;
       through which it was that Mrs Clennam first happened to employ Miss
       Dorrit.' Plornish repeated, employ Miss Dorrit; and Mrs Plornish having
       come to an end, feigned to bite the fingers of the little hand as she
       kissed it.

       'The landlord of the Yard,' said Arthur Clennam, 'is--'

       'He is Mr Casby, by name, he is,' said Plornish, 'and Pancks, he
       collects the rents. That,' added Mr Plornish, dwelling on the subject
       with a slow thoughtfulness that appeared to have no connection with any
       specific object, and to lead him nowhere, 'that is about what _they_ are,
       you may believe me or not, as you think proper.'

       'Ay?' returned Clennam, thoughtful in his turn. 'Mr Casby, too! An old
       acquaintance of mine, long ago!'

       Mr Plornish did not see his road to any comment on this fact, and made
       none. As there truly was no reason why he should have the least interest
       in it, Arthur Clennam went on to the present purport of his visit;
       namely, to make Plornish the instrument of effecting Tip's release,
       with as little detriment as possible to the self-reliance and
       self-helpfulness of the young man, supposing him to possess any remnant
       of those qualities: without doubt a very wide stretch of supposition.
       Plornish, having been made acquainted with the cause of action from the
       Defendant's own mouth, gave Arthur to understand that the Plaintiff
       was a 'Chaunter'--meaning, not a singer of anthems, but a seller of
       horses--and that he (Plornish) considered that ten shillings in the
       pound 'would settle handsome,' and that more would be a waste of money.
       The Principal and instrument soon drove off together to a stable-yard in
       High Holborn, where a remarkably fine grey gelding, worth, at the lowest
       figure, seventy-five guineas (not taking into account the value of the
               shot he had been made to swallow for the improvement of his form), was
       to be parted with for a twenty-pound note, in consequence of his having
       run away last week with Mrs Captain Barbary of Cheltenham, who wasn't up
       to a horse of his courage, and who, in mere spite, insisted on selling
       him for that ridiculous sum: or, in other words, on giving him away.
       Plornish, going up this yard alone and leaving his Principal outside,
       found a gentleman with tight drab legs, a rather old hat, a little
       hooked stick, and a blue neckerchief (Captain Maroon of Gloucestershire,
               a private friend of Captain Barbary); who happened to be there, in
       a friendly way, to mention these little circumstances concerning the
       remarkably fine grey gelding to any real judge of a horse and quick
       snapper-up of a good thing, who might look in at that address as per
       advertisement. This gentleman, happening also to be the Plaintiff in the
       Tip case, referred Mr Plornish to his solicitor, and declined to treat
       with Mr Plornish, or even to endure his presence in the yard, unless
       he appeared there with a twenty-pound note: in which case only, the
       gentleman would augur from appearances that he meant business, and
       might be induced to talk to him. On this hint, Mr Plornish retired
       to communicate with his Principal, and presently came back with the
       required credentials. Then said Captain Maroon, 'Now, how much time do
       you want to make the other twenty in? Now, I'll give you a month.' Then
       said Captain Maroon, when that wouldn't suit, 'Now, I'll tell what I'll
       do with you. You shall get me a good bill at four months, made payable
       at a banking-house, for the other twenty!' Then said Captain Maroon,
       when _that_ wouldn't suit, 'Now, come; Here's the last I've got to say
       to you. You shall give me another ten down, and I'll run my pen clean
       through it.' Then said Captain Maroon when _that_ wouldn't suit, 'Now,
       I'll tell you what it is, and this shuts it up; he has used me bad, but
       I'll let him off for another five down and a bottle of wine; and if you
       mean done, say done, and if you don't like it, leave it.' Finally said
       Captain Maroon, when _that_ wouldn't suit either, 'Hand over, then!'--And
       in consideration of the first offer, gave a receipt in full and
       discharged the prisoner.

       'Mr Plornish,' said Arthur, 'I trust to you, if you please, to keep my
       secret. If you will undertake to let the young man know that he is free,
       and to tell him that you were employed to compound for the debt by
       some one whom you are not at liberty to name, you will not only do me a
       service, but may do him one, and his sister also.'

       'The last reason, sir,' said Plornish, 'would be quite sufficient. Your
       wishes shall be attended to.'

       'A Friend has obtained his discharge, you can say if you please. A
       Friend who hopes that for his sister's sake, if for no one else's, he
       will make good use of his liberty.'

       'Your wishes, sir, shall be attended to.'

       'And if you will be so good, in your better knowledge of the family, as
       to communicate freely with me, and to point out to me any means by which
       you think I may be delicately and really useful to Little Dorrit, I
       shall feel under an obligation to you.'

       'Don't name it, sir,' returned Plornish, 'it'll be ekally a pleasure an
       a--it'l be ekally a pleasure and a--' Finding himself unable to balance
       his sentence after two efforts, Mr Plornish wisely dropped it. He took
       Clennam's card and appropriate pecuniary compliment.

       He was earnest to finish his commission at once, and his Principal
       was in the same mind. So his Principal offered to set him down at the
       Marshalsea Gate, and they drove in that direction over Blackfriars
       Bridge. On the way, Arthur elicited from his new friend a confused
       summary of the interior life of Bleeding Heart Yard. They was all hard
       up there, Mr Plornish said, uncommon hard up, to be sure. Well, he
       couldn't say how it was; he didn't know as anybody _could_ say how it
       was; all he know'd was, that so it was. When a man felt, on his own
       back and in his own belly, that poor he was, that man (Mr Plornish gave
               it as his decided belief) know'd well that he was poor somehow or
       another, and you couldn't talk it out of him, no more than you could
       talk Beef into him. Then you see, some people as was better off said,
       and a good many such people lived pretty close up to the mark themselves
       if not beyond it so he'd heerd, that they was 'improvident' (that was
               the favourite word) down the Yard. For instance, if they see a man with
       his wife and children going to Hampton Court in a Wan, perhaps once in a
       year, they says, 'Hallo! I thought you was poor, my improvident friend!'
       Why, Lord, how hard it was upon a man! What was a man to do? He couldn't
       go mollancholy mad, and even if he did, you wouldn't be the better for
       it. In Mr Plornish's judgment you would be the worse for it. Yet you
       seemed to want to make a man mollancholy mad. You was always at it--if
       not with your right hand, with your left. What was they a doing in the
       Yard? Why, take a look at 'em and see. There was the girls and their
       mothers a working at their sewing, or their shoe-binding, or their
       trimming, or their waistcoat making, day and night and night and day,
       and not more than able to keep body and soul together after all--often
       not so much. There was people of pretty well all sorts of trades you
       could name, all wanting to work, and yet not able to get it. There was
       old people, after working all their lives, going and being shut up in
       the workhouse, much worse fed and lodged and treated altogether,
       than--Mr Plornish said manufacturers, but appeared to mean malefactors.
       Why, a man didn't know where to turn himself for a crumb of comfort. As
       to who was to blame for it, Mr Plornish didn't know who was to blame for
       it. He could tell you who suffered, but he couldn't tell you whose fault
       it was. It wasn't _his_ place to find out, and who'd mind what he said,
       if he did find out? He only know'd that it wasn't put right by them what
       undertook that line of business, and that it didn't come right of
       itself. And, in brief, his illogical opinion was, that if you couldn't
       do nothing for him, you had better take nothing from him for doing of
       it; so far as he could make out, that was about what it come to. Thus,
       in a prolix, gently-growling, foolish way, did Plornish turn the tangled
       skein of his estate about and about, like a blind man who was trying to
       find some beginning or end to it; until they reached the prison gate.
       There, he left his Principal alone; to wonder, as he rode away, how many
       thousand Plornishes there might be within a day or two's journey of the
       Circumlocution Office, playing sundry curious variations on the same
       tune, which were not known by ear in that glorious institution.



The mention of Mr Casby again revived in Clennam's memory the
smouldering embers of curiosity and interest which Mrs Flintwinch had
fanned on the night of his arrival. Flora Casby had been the beloved of
his boyhood; and Flora was the daughter and only child of wooden-headed
old Christopher (so he was still occasionally spoken of by some
        irreverent spirits who had had dealings with him, and in whom
        familiarity had bred its proverbial result perhaps), who was reputed to
be rich in weekly tenants, and to get a good quantity of blood out of
the stones of several unpromising courts and alleys.

After some days of inquiry and research, Arthur Clennam became convinced
that the case of the Father of the Marshalsea was indeed a hopeless one,
     and sorrowfully resigned the idea of helping him to freedom again. He
     had no hopeful inquiry to make at present, concerning Little Dorrit
     either; but he argued with himself that it might--for anything he
     knew--it might be serviceable to the poor child, if he renewed this
     acquaintance. It is hardly necessary to add that beyond all doubt he
     would have presented himself at Mr Casby's door, if there had been no
     Little Dorrit in existence; for we all know how we all deceive
     ourselves--that is to say, how people in general, our profounder selves
     excepted, deceive themselves--as to motives of action.

     With a comfortable impression upon him, and quite an honest one in its
     way, that he was still patronising Little Dorrit in doing what had no
     reference to her, he found himself one afternoon at the corner of Mr
     Casby's street. Mr Casby lived in a street in the Gray's Inn Road, which
     had set off from that thoroughfare with the intention of running at one
     heat down into the valley, and up again to the top of Pentonville Hill;
     but which had run itself out of breath in twenty yards, and had stood
     still ever since. There is no such place in that part now; but it
     remained there for many years, looking with a baulked countenance at
     the wilderness patched with unfruitful gardens and pimpled with eruptive
     summerhouses, that it had meant to run over in no time.

     'The house,' thought Clennam, as he crossed to the door, 'is as little
     changed as my mother's, and looks almost as gloomy. But the likeness
     ends outside. I know its staid repose within. The smell of its jars of
     old rose-leaves and lavender seems to come upon me even here.'

     When his knock at the bright brass knocker of obsolete shape brought a
     woman-servant to the door, those faded scents in truth saluted him like
     wintry breath that had a faint remembrance in it of the bygone spring.
     He stepped into the sober, silent, air-tight house--one might have
     fancied it to have been stifled by Mutes in the Eastern manner--and the
     door, closing again, seemed to shut out sound and motion. The
     furniture was formal, grave, and quaker-like, but well-kept; and had as
     prepossessing an aspect as anything, from a human creature to a wooden
     stool, that is meant for much use and is preserved for little, can ever
     wear. There was a grave clock, ticking somewhere up the staircase; and
     there was a songless bird in the same direction, pecking at his cage, as
     if he were ticking too. The parlour-fire ticked in the grate. There was
     only one person on the parlour-hearth, and the loud watch in his pocket
     ticked audibly.

     The servant-maid had ticked the two words 'Mr Clennam' so softly that
     she had not been heard; and he consequently stood, within the door
     she had closed, unnoticed. The figure of a man advanced in life, whose
     smooth grey eyebrows seemed to move to the ticking as the fire-light
     flickered on them, sat in an arm-chair, with his list shoes on the
     rug, and his thumbs slowly revolving over one another. This was old
     Christopher Casby--recognisable at a glance--as unchanged in twenty
     years and upward as his own solid furniture--as little touched by the
     influence of the varying seasons as the old rose-leaves and old lavender
     in his porcelain jars.

     Perhaps there never was a man, in this troublesome world, so troublesome
     for the imagination to picture as a boy. And yet he had changed very
     little in his progress through life. Confronting him, in the room in
     which he sat, was a boy's portrait, which anybody seeing him would have
     identified as Master Christopher Casby, aged ten: though disguised with
     a haymaking rake, for which he had had, at any time, as much taste or
     use as for a diving-bell; and sitting (on one of his own legs) upon a
     bank of violets, moved to precocious contemplation by the spire of a
     village church. There was the same smooth face and forehead, the same
     calm blue eye, the same placid air. The shining bald head, which looked
     so very large because it shone so much; and the long grey hair at its
     sides and back, like floss silk or spun glass, which looked so very
     benevolent because it was never cut; were not, of course, to be seen in
     the boy as in the old man. Nevertheless, in the Seraphic creature with
     the haymaking rake, were clearly to be discerned the rudiments of the
     Patriarch with the list shoes.

     Patriarch was the name which many people delighted to give him.
     Various old ladies in the neighbourhood spoke of him as The Last of the
     Patriarchs. So grey, so slow, so quiet, so impassionate, so very bumpy
     in the head, Patriarch was the word for him. He had been accosted in the
     streets, and respectfully solicited to become a Patriarch for painters
     and for sculptors; with so much importunity, in sooth, that it would
     appear to be beyond the Fine Arts to remember the points of a Patriarch,
     or to invent one. Philanthropists of both sexes had asked who he was,
     and on being informed, 'Old Christopher Casby, formerly Town-agent to
     Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle,' had cried in a rapture of disappointment,
     'Oh! why, with that head, is he not a benefactor to his species! Oh!
     why, with that head, is he not a father to the orphan and a friend to
     the friendless!' With that head, however, he remained old Christopher
     Casby, proclaimed by common report rich in house property; and with that
     head, he now sat in his silent parlour. Indeed it would be the height of
     unreason to expect him to be sitting there without that head.

     Arthur Clennam moved to attract his attention, and the grey eyebrows
     turned towards him.

     'I beg your pardon,' said Clennam, 'I fear you did not hear me
     announced?'

     'No, sir, I did not. Did you wish to see me, sir?'

     'I wished to pay my respects.'

     Mr Casby seemed a feather's weight disappointed by the last words,
     having perhaps prepared himself for the visitor's wishing to pay
     something else. 'Have I the pleasure, sir,' he proceeded--'take a chair,
     if you please--have I the pleasure of knowing--? Ah! truly, yes, I think
     I have! I believe I am not mistaken in supposing that I am acquainted
     with those features? I think I address a gentleman of whose return to
     this country I was informed by Mr Flintwinch?'

     'That is your present visitor.'

     'Really! Mr Clennam?'

     'No other, Mr Casby.'

     'Mr Clennam, I am glad to see you. How have you been since we met?'

     Without thinking it worth while to explain that in the course of some
     quarter of a century he had experienced occasional slight fluctuations
     in his health and spirits, Clennam answered generally that he had never
     been better, or something equally to the purpose; and shook hands with
     the possessor of 'that head' as it shed its patriarchal light upon him.

     'We are older, Mr Clennam,' said Christopher Casby.

     'We are--not younger,' said Clennam. After this wise remark he felt that
     he was scarcely shining with brilliancy, and became aware that he was
     nervous.

     'And your respected father,' said Mr Casby, 'is no more! I was grieved
     to hear it, Mr Clennam, I was grieved.'

     Arthur replied in the usual way that he felt infinitely obliged to him.

     'There was a time,' said Mr Casby, 'when your parents and myself were
     not on friendly terms. There was a little family misunderstanding among
     us. Your respected mother was rather jealous of her son, maybe; when I
     say her son, I mean your worthy self, your worthy self.'

     His smooth face had a bloom upon it like ripe wall-fruit. What with
     his blooming face, and that head, and his blue eyes, he seemed to be
     delivering sentiments of rare wisdom and virtue. In like manner, his
     physiognomical expression seemed to teem with benignity. Nobody could
     have said where the wisdom was, or where the virtue was, or where the
     benignity was; but they all seemed to be somewhere about him.

     'Those times, however,' pursued Mr Casby, 'are past and gone, past and
     gone. I do myself the pleasure of making a visit to your respected
     mother occasionally, and of admiring the fortitude and strength of mind
     with which she bears her trials, bears her trials.'

     When he made one of these little repetitions, sitting with his hands
     crossed before him, he did it with his head on one side, and a gentle
     smile, as if he had something in his thoughts too sweetly profound to be
     put into words. As if he denied himself the pleasure of uttering it,
     lest he should soar too high; and his meekness therefore preferred to be
     unmeaning.

     'I have heard that you were kind enough on one of those occasions,' said
     Arthur, catching at the opportunity as it drifted past him, 'to mention
     Little Dorrit to my mother.'

     'Little--? Dorrit? That's the seamstress who was mentioned to me by a
     small tenant of mine? Yes, yes. Dorrit? That's the name. Ah, yes, yes!
     You call her Little Dorrit?'

     No road in that direction. Nothing came of the cross-cut. It led no
     further.

     'My daughter Flora,' said Mr Casby, 'as you may have heard probably, Mr
     Clennam, was married and established in life, several years ago. She
     had the misfortune to lose her husband when she had been married a few
     months. She resides with me again. She will be glad to see you, if you
     will permit me to let her know that you are here.'

     'By all means,' returned Clennam. 'I should have preferred the request,
     if your kindness had not anticipated me.'

     Upon this Mr Casby rose up in his list shoes, and with a slow, heavy
     step (he was of an elephantine build), made for the door. He had a long
     wide-skirted bottle-green coat on, and a bottle-green pair of trousers,
     and a bottle-green waistcoat. The Patriarchs were not dressed in
     bottle-green broadcloth, and yet his clothes looked patriarchal.

     He had scarcely left the room, and allowed the ticking to become audible
     again, when a quick hand turned a latchkey in the house-door, opened it,
     and shut it. Immediately afterwards, a quick and eager short dark man
     came into the room with so much way upon him that he was within a foot
     of Clennam before he could stop.

     'Halloa!' he said.

     Clennam saw no reason why he should not say 'Halloa!' too.

     'What's the matter?' said the short dark man.

     'I have not heard that anything is the matter,' returned Clennam.

     'Where's Mr Casby?' asked the short dark man, looking about.

     'He will be here directly, if you want him.'

     '_I_ want him?' said the short dark man. 'Don't you?'

     This elicited a word or two of explanation from Clennam, during the
     delivery of which the short dark man held his breath and looked at him.
     He was dressed in black and rusty iron grey; had jet black beads of
     eyes; a scrubby little black chin; wiry black hair striking out from his
     head in prongs, like forks or hair-pins; and a complexion that was very
     dingy by nature, or very dirty by art, or a compound of nature and art.
     He had dirty hands and dirty broken nails, and looked as if he had been
     in the coals; he was in a perspiration, and snorted and sniffed and
     puffed and blew, like a little labouring steam-engine.

     'Oh!' said he, when Arthur told him how he came to be there. 'Very well.
     That's right. If he should ask for Pancks, will you be so good as to say
     that Pancks is come in?' And so, with a snort and a puff, he worked out
     by another door.

     Now, in the old days at home, certain audacious doubts respecting the
     last of the Patriarchs, which were afloat in the air, had, by some
     forgotten means, come in contact with Arthur's sensorium. He was aware
     of motes and specks of suspicion in the atmosphere of that time; seen
     through which medium, Christopher Casby was a mere Inn signpost, without
     any Inn--an invitation to rest and be thankful, when there was no place
     to put up at, and nothing whatever to be thankful for. He knew that some
     of these specks even represented Christopher as capable of harbouring
     designs in 'that head,' and as being a crafty impostor. Other motes
     there were which showed him as a heavy, selfish, drifting Booby, who,
     having stumbled, in the course of his unwieldy jostlings against other
     men, on the discovery that to get through life with ease and credit,
     he had but to hold his tongue, keep the bald part of his head well
     polished, and leave his hair alone, had had just cunning enough to seize
     the idea and stick to it. It was said that his being town-agent to
     Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle was referable, not to his having the least
     business capacity, but to his looking so supremely benignant that nobody
     could suppose the property screwed or jobbed under such a man; also,
     that for similar reasons he now got more money out of his own wretched
     lettings, unquestioned, than anybody with a less nobby and less shining
     crown could possibly have done. In a word, it was represented (Clennam
             called to mind, alone in the ticking parlour) that many people select
     their models, much as the painters, just now mentioned, select theirs;
     and that, whereas in the Royal Academy some evil old ruffian of a
     Dog-stealer will annually be found embodying all the cardinal virtues,
     on account of his eyelashes, or his chin, or his legs (thereby planting
             thorns of confusion in the breasts of the more observant students of
             nature), so, in the great social Exhibition, accessories are often
     accepted in lieu of the internal character.

     Calling these things to mind, and ranging Mr Pancks in a row with them,
     Arthur Clennam leaned this day to the opinion, without quite deciding
     on it, that the last of the Patriarchs was the drifting Booby aforesaid,
     with the one idea of keeping the bald part of his head highly polished:
     and that, much as an unwieldy ship in the Thames river may sometimes be
     seen heavily driving with the tide, broadside on, stern first, in its
     own way and in the way of everything else, though making a great show
     of navigation, when all of a sudden, a little coaly steam-tug will bear
     down upon it, take it in tow, and bustle off with it; similarly the
     cumbrous Patriarch had been taken in tow by the snorting Pancks, and was
     now following in the wake of that dingy little craft.

     The return of Mr Casby with his daughter Flora, put an end to these
     meditations. Clennam's eyes no sooner fell upon the subject of his old
     passion than it shivered and broke to pieces.

     Most men will be found sufficiently true to themselves to be true to
     an old idea. It is no proof of an inconstant mind, but exactly the
     opposite, when the idea will not bear close comparison with the reality,
     and the contrast is a fatal shock to it. Such was Clennam's case. In his
     youth he had ardently loved this woman, and had heaped upon her all the
     locked-up wealth of his affection and imagination. That wealth had been,
     in his desert home, like Robinson Crusoe's money; exchangeable with no
     one, lying idle in the dark to rust, until he poured it out for her.
     Ever since that memorable time, though he had, until the night of his
     arrival, as completely dismissed her from any association with his
     Present or Future as if she had been dead (which she might easily
             have been for anything he knew), he had kept the old fancy of the Past
     unchanged, in its old sacred place. And now, after all, the last of the
     Patriarchs coolly walked into the parlour, saying in effect, 'Be good
     enough to throw it down and dance upon it. This is Flora.'

     Flora, always tall, had grown to be very broad too, and short of breath;
     but that was not much. Flora, whom he had left a lily, had become a
     peony; but that was not much. Flora, who had seemed enchanting in all
     she said and thought, was diffuse and silly. That was much. Flora, who
     had been spoiled and artless long ago, was determined to be spoiled and
     artless now. That was a fatal blow.

     This is Flora!

     'I am sure,' giggled Flora, tossing her head with a caricature of
     her girlish manner, such as a mummer might have presented at her own
     funeral, if she had lived and died in classical antiquity, 'I am ashamed
     to see Mr Clennam, I am a mere fright, I know he'll find me fearfully
     changed, I am actually an old woman, it's shocking to be found out, it's
     really shocking!'

     He assured her that she was just what he had expected and that time had
     not stood still with himself.

     'Oh! But with a gentleman it's so different and really you look so
     amazingly well that you have no right to say anything of the kind,
     while, as to me, you know--oh!' cried Flora with a little scream, 'I am
     dreadful!'

     The Patriarch, apparently not yet understanding his own part in the
     drama under representation, glowed with vacant serenity.

     'But if we talk of not having changed,' said Flora, who, whatever
     she said, never once came to a full stop, 'look at Papa, is not Papa
     precisely what he was when you went away, isn't it cruel and unnatural
     of Papa to be such a reproach to his own child, if we go on in this way
     much longer people who don't know us will begin to suppose that I am
     Papa's Mama!'

     That must be a long time hence, Arthur considered.

     'Oh Mr Clennam you insincerest of creatures,' said Flora, 'I perceive
     already you have not lost your old way of paying compliments, your old
     way when you used to pretend to be so sentimentally struck you know--at
     least I don't mean that, I--oh I don't know what I mean!' Here Flora
     tittered confusedly, and gave him one of her old glances.

     The Patriarch, as if he now began to perceive that his part in the piece
     was to get off the stage as soon as might be, rose, and went to the door
     by which Pancks had worked out, hailing that Tug by name. He received
     an answer from some little Dock beyond, and was towed out of sight
     directly.

     'You mustn't think of going yet,' said Flora--Arthur had looked at his
     hat, being in a ludicrous dismay, and not knowing what to do: 'you could
     never be so unkind as to think of going, Arthur--I mean Mr Arthur--or I
     suppose Mr Clennam would be far more proper--but I am sure I don't know
     what I am saying--without a word about the dear old days gone for ever,
     when I come to think of it I dare say it would be much better not to
     speak of them and it's highly probable that you have some much more
     agreeable engagement and pray let Me be the last person in the world
     to interfere with it though there _was_ a time, but I am running into
     nonsense again.'

     Was it possible that Flora could have been such a chatterer in the
     days she referred to? Could there have been anything like her present
     disjointed volubility in the fascinations that had captivated him?

     'Indeed I have little doubt,' said Flora, running on with astonishing
     speed, and pointing her conversation with nothing but commas, and very
     few of them, 'that you are married to some Chinese lady, being in China
     so long and being in business and naturally desirous to settle and
     extend your connection nothing was more likely than that you should
     propose to a Chinese lady and nothing was more natural I am sure than
     that the Chinese lady should accept you and think herself very well off
     too, I only hope she's not a Pagodian dissenter.'

     'I am not,' returned Arthur, smiling in spite of himself, 'married to
     any lady, Flora.'

     'Oh good gracious me I hope you never kept yourself a bachelor so long
     on my account!' tittered Flora; 'but of course you never did why should
     you, pray don't answer, I don't know where I'm running to, oh do tell me
     something about the Chinese ladies whether their eyes are really so long
     and narrow always putting me in mind of mother-of-pearl fish at cards
     and do they really wear tails down their back and plaited too or is
     it only the men, and when they pull their hair so very tight off their
     foreheads don't they hurt themselves, and why do they stick little bells
     all over their bridges and temples and hats and things or don't they
     really do it?' Flora gave him another of her old glances. Instantly she
     went on again, as if he had spoken in reply for some time.

     'Then it's all true and they really do! good gracious Arthur!--pray
     excuse me--old habit--Mr Clennam far more proper--what a country to live
     in for so long a time, and with so many lanterns and umbrellas too how
     very dark and wet the climate ought to be and no doubt actually is, and
     the sums of money that must be made by those two trades where everybody
     carries them and hangs them everywhere, the little shoes too and the
     feet screwed back in infancy is quite surprising, what a traveller you
     are!'

     In his ridiculous distress, Clennam received another of the old glances
     without in the least knowing what to do with it.

     'Dear dear,' said Flora, 'only to think of the changes at home
     Arthur--cannot overcome it, and seems so natural, Mr Clennam far more
     proper--since you became familiar with the Chinese customs and language
     which I am persuaded you speak like a Native if not better for you were
     always quick and clever though immensely difficult no doubt, I am sure
     the tea chests alone would kill me if I tried, such changes Arthur--I
     am doing it again, seems so natural, most improper--as no one could have
     believed, who could have ever imagined Mrs Finching when I can't imagine
     it myself!'

     'Is that your married name?' asked Arthur, struck, in the midst of all
     this, by a certain warmth of heart that expressed itself in her tone
     when she referred, however oddly, to the youthful relation in which they
     had stood to one another. 'Finching?'

     'Finching oh yes isn't it a dreadful name, but as Mr F. said when he
     proposed to me which he did seven times and handsomely consented I must
     say to be what he used to call on liking twelve months, after all, he
     wasn't answerable for it and couldn't help it could he, Excellent man,
     not at all like you but excellent man!'

     Flora had at last talked herself out of breath for one moment. One
     moment; for she recovered breath in the act of raising a minute corner
     of her pocket-handkerchief to her eye, as a tribute to the ghost of the
     departed Mr F., and began again.

     'No one could dispute, Arthur--Mr Clennam--that it's quite right you
     should be formally friendly to me under the altered circumstances and
     indeed you couldn't be anything else, at least I suppose not you ought
     to know, but I can't help recalling that there _was_ a time when things
     were very different.'

     'My dear Mrs Finching,' Arthur began, struck by the good tone again.

     'Oh not that nasty ugly name, say Flora!'

     'Flora. I assure you, Flora, I am happy in seeing you once more, and in
     finding that, like me, you have not forgotten the old foolish dreams,
     when we saw all before us in the light of our youth and hope.'

     'You don't seem so,' pouted Flora, 'you take it very coolly, but
     however I know you are disappointed in me, I suppose the Chinese
     ladies--Mandarinesses if you call them so--are the cause or perhaps I am
     the cause myself, it's just as likely.'

     'No, no,' Clennam entreated, 'don't say that.'

     'Oh I must you know,' said Flora, in a positive tone, 'what nonsense not
     to, I know I am not what you expected, I know that very well.'

     In the midst of her rapidity, she had found that out with the quick
     perception of a cleverer woman. The inconsistent and profoundly
     unreasonable way in which she instantly went on, nevertheless, to
     interweave their long-abandoned boy and girl relations with their
     present interview, made Clennam feel as if he were light-headed.

     'One remark,' said Flora, giving their conversation, without the
     slightest notice and to the great terror of Clennam, the tone of a
     love-quarrel, 'I wish to make, one explanation I wish to offer, when
     your Mama came and made a scene of it with my Papa and when I was called
     down into the little breakfast-room where they were looking at one
     another with your Mama's parasol between them seated on two chairs like
     mad bulls what was I to do?'

     'My dear Mrs Finching,' urged Clennam--'all so long ago and so long
     concluded, is it worth while seriously to--'

     'I can't Arthur,' returned Flora, 'be denounced as heartless by the
     whole society of China without setting myself right when I have the
     opportunity of doing so, and you must be very well aware that there
     was Paul and Virginia which had to be returned and which was returned
     without note or comment, not that I mean to say you could have written
     to me watched as I was but if it had only come back with a red wafer on
     the cover I should have known that it meant Come to Pekin Nankeen and
     What's the third place, barefoot.'

     'My dear Mrs Finching, you were not to blame, and I never blamed you.
     We were both too young, too dependent and helpless, to do anything but
     accept our separation.--Pray think how long ago,' gently remonstrated
     Arthur.

     'One more remark,' proceeded Flora with unslackened volubility, 'I wish
     to make, one more explanation I wish to offer, for five days I had a
     cold in the head from crying which I passed entirely in the back
     drawing-room--there is the back drawing-room still on the first floor
     and still at the back of the house to confirm my words--when that dreary
     period had passed a lull succeeded years rolled on and Mr F. became
     acquainted with us at a mutual friend's, he was all attention he called
     next day he soon began to call three evenings a week and to send
     in little things for supper it was not love on Mr F.'s part it was
     adoration, Mr F. proposed with the full approval of Papa and what could
     I do?'

     'Nothing whatever,' said Arthur, with the cheerfulest readiness, 'but
     what you did. Let an old friend assure you of his full conviction that
     you did quite right.'

     'One last remark,' proceeded Flora, rejecting commonplace life with a
     wave of her hand, 'I wish to make, one last explanation I wish to offer,
     there _was_ a time ere Mr F. first paid attentions incapable of being
     mistaken, but that is past and was not to be, dear Mr Clennam you no
     longer wear a golden chain you are free I trust you may be happy, here
     is Papa who is always tiresome and putting in his nose everywhere where
     he is not wanted.'

     With these words, and with a hasty gesture fraught with timid
     caution--such a gesture had Clennam's eyes been familiar with in the old
     time--poor Flora left herself at eighteen years of age, a long long way
     behind again; and came to a full stop at last.

     Or rather, she left about half of herself at eighteen years of age
     behind, and grafted the rest on to the relict of the late Mr F.; thus
     making a moral mermaid of herself, which her once boy-lover contemplated
     with feelings wherein his sense of the sorrowful and his sense of the
     comical were curiously blended.

     For example. As if there were a secret understanding between herself
     and Clennam of the most thrilling nature; as if the first of a train of
     post-chaises and four, extending all the way to Scotland, were at that
     moment round the corner; and as if she couldn't (and wouldn't) have
     walked into the Parish Church with him, under the shade of the family
     umbrella, with the Patriarchal blessing on her head, and the perfect
     concurrence of all mankind; Flora comforted her soul with agonies of
     mysterious signalling, expressing dread of discovery. With the sensation
     of becoming more and more light-headed every minute, Clennam saw the
     relict of the late Mr F. enjoying herself in the most wonderful manner,
     by putting herself and him in their old places, and going through all
     the old performances--now, when the stage was dusty, when the scenery
     was faded, when the youthful actors were dead, when the orchestra was
     empty, when the lights were out. And still, through all this grotesque
     revival of what he remembered as having once been prettily natural to
     her, he could not but feel that it revived at sight of him, and that
     there was a tender memory in it.

     The Patriarch insisted on his staying to dinner, and Flora signalled
     'Yes!' Clennam so wished he could have done more than stay to dinner--so
     heartily wished he could have found the Flora that had been, or that
     never had been--that he thought the least atonement he could make for
     the disappointment he almost felt ashamed of, was to give himself up to
     the family desire. Therefore, he stayed to dinner.

     Pancks dined with them. Pancks steamed out of his little dock at a
     quarter before six, and bore straight down for the Patriarch, who
     happened to be then driving, in an inane manner, through a stagnant
     account of Bleeding Heart Yard. Pancks instantly made fast to him and
     hauled him out.

     'Bleeding Heart Yard?' said Pancks, with a puff and a snort. 'It's a
     troublesome property. Don't pay you badly, but rents are very hard to
     get there. You have more trouble with that one place than with all the
     places belonging to you.'

     Just as the big ship in tow gets the credit, with most spectators, of
     being the powerful object, so the Patriarch usually seemed to have said
     himself whatever Pancks said for him.

     'Indeed?' returned Clennam, upon whom this impression was so efficiently
     made by a mere gleam of the polished head that he spoke the ship instead
     of the Tug. 'The people are so poor there?'

     '_You_ can't say, you know,' snorted Pancks, taking one of his dirty hands
     out of his rusty iron-grey pockets to bite his nails, if he could find
     any, and turning his beads of eyes upon his employer, 'whether they're
     poor or not. They say they are, but they all say that. When a man says
     he's rich, you're generally sure he isn't. Besides, if they _are_ poor,
     you can't help it. You'd be poor yourself if you didn't get your rents.'

     'True enough,' said Arthur.

     'You're not going to keep open house for all the poor of London,'
     pursued Pancks. 'You're not going to lodge 'em for nothing. You're not
     going to open your gates wide and let 'em come free. Not if you know it,
     you ain't.'

     Mr Casby shook his head, in Placid and benignant generality.

     'If a man takes a room of you at half-a-crown a week, and when the week
     comes round hasn't got the half-crown, you say to that man, Why have you
     got the room, then? If you haven't got the one thing, why have you got
     the other? What have you been and done with your money? What do you mean
     by it? What are you up to? That's what _you_ say to a man of that sort;
     and if you didn't say it, more shame for you!' Mr Pancks here made a
     singular and startling noise, produced by a strong blowing effort in the
     region of the nose, unattended by any result but that acoustic one.

     'You have some extent of such property about the east and north-east
     here, I believe?' said Clennam, doubtful which of the two to address.

     'Oh, pretty well,' said Pancks. 'You're not particular to east or
     north-east, any point of the compass will do for you. What you want is
     a good investment and a quick return. You take it where you can find it.
     You ain't nice as to situation--not you.'

     There was a fourth and most original figure in the Patriarchal tent, who
     also appeared before dinner. This was an amazing little old woman, with
     a face like a staring wooden doll too cheap for expression, and a stiff
     yellow wig perched unevenly on the top of her head, as if the child who
     owned the doll had driven a tack through it anywhere, so that it only
     got fastened on. Another remarkable thing in this little old woman was,
     that the same child seemed to have damaged her face in two or three
     places with some blunt instrument in the nature of a spoon; her
     countenance, and particularly the tip of her nose, presenting the
     phenomena of several dints, generally answering to the bowl of that
     article. A further remarkable thing in this little old woman was, that
     she had no name but Mr F.'s Aunt.

     She broke upon the visitor's view under the following circumstances:
     Flora said when the first dish was being put on the table, perhaps Mr
     Clennam might not have heard that Mr F. had left her a legacy? Clennam
     in return implied his hope that Mr F. had endowed the wife whom he
     adored, with the greater part of his worldly substance, if not with all.
     Flora said, oh yes, she didn't mean that, Mr F. had made a beautiful
     will, but he had left her as a separate legacy, his Aunt. She then
     went out of the room to fetch the legacy, and, on her return, rather
     triumphantly presented 'Mr F.'s Aunt.'

     The major characteristics discoverable by the stranger in Mr F.'s Aunt,
     were extreme severity and grim taciturnity; sometimes interrupted by
     a propensity to offer remarks in a deep warning voice, which, being
     totally uncalled for by anything said by anybody, and traceable to no
     association of ideas, confounded and terrified the Mind. Mr F.'s Aunt
     may have thrown in these observations on some system of her own, and it
     may have been ingenious, or even subtle: but the key to it was wanted.

     The neatly-served and well-cooked dinner (for everything about the
             Patriarchal household promoted quiet digestion) began with some soup,
     some fried soles, a butter-boat of shrimp sauce, and a dish of potatoes.
     The conversation still turned on the receipt of rents. Mr F.'s Aunt,
     after regarding the company for ten minutes with a malevolent gaze,
     delivered the following fearful remark:

     'When we lived at Henley, Barnes's gander was stole by tinkers.'

     Mr Pancks courageously nodded his head and said, 'All right, ma'am.' But
     the effect of this mysterious communication upon Clennam was absolutely
     to frighten him. And another circumstance invested this old lady with
     peculiar terrors. Though she was always staring, she never acknowledged
     that she saw any individual. The polite and attentive stranger would
     desire, say, to consult her inclinations on the subject of potatoes. His
     expressive action would be hopelessly lost upon her, and what could he
     do? No man could say, 'Mr F.'s Aunt, will you permit me?' Every man
     retired from the spoon, as Clennam did, cowed and baffled.

     There was mutton, a steak, and an apple-pie--nothing in the remotest
     way connected with ganders--and the dinner went on like a disenchanted
     feast, as it truly was. Once upon a time Clennam had sat at that table
     taking no heed of anything but Flora; now the principal heed he took
     of Flora was to observe, against his will, that she was very fond of
     porter, that she combined a great deal of sherry with sentiment, and
     that if she were a little overgrown, it was upon substantial grounds.
     The last of the Patriarchs had always been a mighty eater, and he
     disposed of an immense quantity of solid food with the benignity of a
     good soul who was feeding some one else. Mr Pancks, who was always in a
     hurry, and who referred at intervals to a little dirty notebook which he
     kept beside him (perhaps containing the names of the defaulters he meant
             to look up by way of dessert), took in his victuals much as if he were
     coaling; with a good deal of noise, a good deal of dropping about, and a
     puff and a snort occasionally, as if he were nearly ready to steam away.

     All through dinner, Flora combined her present appetite for eating and
     drinking with her past appetite for romantic love, in a way that made
     Clennam afraid to lift his eyes from his plate; since he could not
     look towards her without receiving some glance of mysterious meaning or
     warning, as if they were engaged in a plot. Mr F.'s Aunt sat silently
     defying him with an aspect of the greatest bitterness, until the removal
     of the cloth and the appearance of the decanters, when she originated
     another observation--struck into the conversation like a clock, without
     consulting anybody.

     Flora had just said, 'Mr Clennam, will you give me a glass of port for
     Mr F.'s Aunt?'

     'The Monument near London Bridge,' that lady instantly proclaimed, 'was
     put up arter the Great Fire of London; and the Great Fire of London was
     not the fire in which your uncle George's workshops was burned down.'

     Mr Pancks, with his former courage, said, 'Indeed, ma'am? All right!'
     But appearing to be incensed by imaginary contradiction, or other
     ill-usage, Mr F.'s Aunt, instead of relapsing into silence, made the
     following additional proclamation:

     'I hate a fool!'

     She imparted to this sentiment, in itself almost Solomonic, so extremely
     injurious and personal a character by levelling it straight at the
     visitor's head, that it became necessary to lead Mr F.'s Aunt from
     the room. This was quietly done by Flora; Mr F.'s Aunt offering no
     resistance, but inquiring on her way out, 'What he come there for,
     then?' with implacable animosity.

     When Flora returned, she explained that her legacy was a clever
     old lady, but was sometimes a little singular, and 'took
     dislikes'--peculiarities of which Flora seemed to be proud rather than
     otherwise. As Flora's good nature shone in the case, Clennam had no
     fault to find with the old lady for eliciting it, now that he was
     relieved from the terrors of her presence; and they took a glass or
     two of wine in peace. Foreseeing then that the Pancks would shortly get
     under weigh, and that the Patriarch would go to sleep, he pleaded the
     necessity of visiting his mother, and asked Mr Pancks in which direction
     he was going?

     'Citywards, sir,' said Pancks.

     'Shall we walk together?' said Arthur.

     'Quite agreeable,' said Pancks.

     Meanwhile Flora was murmuring in rapid snatches for his ear, that there
     was a time and that the past was a yawning gulf however and that a
     golden chain no longer bound him and that she revered the memory of the
     late Mr F. and that she should be at home to-morrow at half-past one
     and that the decrees of Fate were beyond recall and that she considered
     nothing so improbable as that he ever walked on the north-west side of
     Gray's-Inn Gardens at exactly four o'clock in the afternoon. He tried
     at parting to give his hand in frankness to the existing Flora--not the
     vanished Flora, or the mermaid--but Flora wouldn't have it, couldn't
     have it, was wholly destitute of the power of separating herself and him
     from their bygone characters. He left the house miserably enough; and
     so much more light-headed than ever, that if it had not been his good
     fortune to be towed away, he might, for the first quarter of an hour,
     have drifted anywhere.

     When he began to come to himself, in the cooler air and the absence of
     Flora, he found Pancks at full speed, cropping such scanty pasturage of
     nails as he could find, and snorting at intervals. These, in conjunction
     with one hand in his pocket and his roughened hat hind side before, were
     evidently the conditions under which he reflected.

     'A fresh night!' said Arthur.

     'Yes, it's pretty fresh,' assented Pancks. 'As a stranger you feel the
     climate more than I do, I dare say. Indeed I haven't got time to feel
     it.'

     'You lead such a busy life?'

     'Yes, I have always some of 'em to look up, or something to look after.
     But I like business,' said Pancks, getting on a little faster. 'What's a
     man made for?'

     'For nothing else?' said Clennam.

     Pancks put the counter question, 'What else?' It packed up, in the
     smallest compass, a weight that had rested on Clennam's life; and he
     made no answer.

     'That's what I ask our weekly tenants,' said Pancks. 'Some of 'em will
     pull long faces to me, and say, Poor as you see us, master, we're always
     grinding, drudging, toiling, every minute we're awake. I say to them,
     What else are you made for? It shuts them up. They haven't a word to
     answer. What else are you made for? That clinches it.'

     'Ah dear, dear, dear!' sighed Clennam.

     'Here am I,' said Pancks, pursuing his argument with the weekly tenant.
     'What else do you suppose I think I am made for? Nothing. Rattle me out
     of bed early, set me going, give me as short a time as you like to bolt
     my meals in, and keep me at it. Keep me always at it, and I'll keep you
     always at it, you keep somebody else always at it. There you are with
     the Whole Duty of Man in a commercial country.'

     When they had walked a little further in silence, Clennam said: 'Have
     you no taste for anything, Mr Pancks?'

     'What's taste?' drily retorted Pancks.

     'Let us say inclination.'

     'I have an inclination to get money, sir,' said Pancks, 'if you will
     show me how.' He blew off that sound again, and it occurred to his
     companion for the first time that it was his way of laughing. He was a
     singular man in all respects; he might not have been quite in earnest,
     but that the short, hard, rapid manner in which he shot out these
     cinders of principles, as if it were done by mechanical revolvency,
     seemed irreconcilable with banter.

     'You are no great reader, I suppose?' said Clennam.

     'Never read anything but letters and accounts. Never collect anything
     but advertisements relative to next of kin. If _that's_ a taste, I have
     got that. You're not of the Clennams of Cornwall, Mr Clennam?'

     'Not that I ever heard of.'

     'I know you're not. I asked your mother, sir. She has too much character
     to let a chance escape her.'

     'Supposing I had been of the Clennams of Cornwall?'

     'You'd have heard of something to your advantage.'

     'Indeed! I have heard of little enough to my advantage for some time.'

     'There's a Cornish property going a begging, sir, and not a Cornish
     Clennam to have it for the asking,' said Pancks, taking his note-book
     from his breast pocket and putting it in again. 'I turn off here. I wish
     you good night.'

     'Good night!' said Clennam. But the Tug, suddenly lightened, and
     untrammelled by having any weight in tow, was already puffing away into
     the distance.

     They had crossed Smithfield together, and Clennam was left alone at the
     corner of Barbican. He had no intention of presenting himself in his
     mother's dismal room that night, and could not have felt more depressed
     and cast away if he had been in a wilderness. He turned slowly down
     Aldersgate Street, and was pondering his way along towards Saint Paul's,
     purposing to come into one of the great thoroughfares for the sake of
     their light and life, when a crowd of people flocked towards him on the
     same pavement, and he stood aside against a shop to let them pass. As
     they came up, he made out that they were gathered around a something
     that was carried on men's shoulders. He soon saw that it was a litter,
     hastily made of a shutter or some such thing; and a recumbent figure
     upon it, and the scraps of conversation in the crowd, and a muddy bundle
     carried by one man, and a muddy hat carried by another, informed him
     that an accident had occurred. The litter stopped under a lamp before it
     had passed him half-a-dozen paces, for some readjustment of the burden;
     and, the crowd stopping too, he found himself in the midst of the array.

     'An accident going to the Hospital?' he asked an old man beside him, who
     stood shaking his head, inviting conversation.

     'Yes,' said the man, 'along of them Mails. They ought to be prosecuted
     and fined, them Mails. They come a racing out of Lad Lane and Wood
     Street at twelve or fourteen mile a hour, them Mails do. The only wonder
     is, that people ain't killed oftener by them Mails.'

     'This person is not killed, I hope?'

     'I don't know!' said the man, 'it an't for the want of a will in them
     Mails, if he an't.' The speaker having folded his arms, and set in
     comfortably to address his depreciation of them Mails to any of the
     bystanders who would listen, several voices, out of pure sympathy with
     the sufferer, confirmed him; one voice saying to Clennam, 'They're a
     public nuisance, them Mails, sir;' another, '_I_ see one on 'em pull up
     within half a inch of a boy, last night;' another, '_I_ see one on 'em
     go over a cat, sir--and it might have been your own mother;' and all
     representing, by implication, that if he happened to possess any public
     influence, he could not use it better than against them Mails.

     'Why, a native Englishman is put to it every night of his life, to save
     his life from them Mails,' argued the first old man; 'and _he_ knows when
     they're a coming round the corner, to tear him limb from limb. What can
     you expect from a poor foreigner who don't know nothing about 'em!'

     'Is this a foreigner?' said Clennam, leaning forward to look.

     In the midst of such replies as 'Frenchman, sir,' 'Porteghee, sir,'
     'Dutchman, sir,' 'Prooshan, sir,' and other conflicting testimony, he
     now heard a feeble voice asking, both in Italian and in French, for
     water. A general remark going round, in reply, of 'Ah, poor fellow,
     he says he'll never get over it; and no wonder!' Clennam begged to be
     allowed to pass, as he understood the poor creature. He was immediately
     handed to the front, to speak to him.

     'First, he wants some water,' said he, looking round. (A dozen good
             fellows dispersed to get it.) 'Are you badly hurt, my friend?' he asked
     the man on the litter, in Italian.

     'Yes, sir; yes, yes, yes. It's my leg, it's my leg. But it pleases me to
     hear the old music, though I am very bad.'

     'You are a traveller! Stay! See, the water! Let me give you some.'

     They had rested the litter on a pile of paving stones. It was at a
     convenient height from the ground, and by stooping he could lightly
     raise the head with one hand and hold the glass to his lips with the
     other. A little, muscular, brown man, with black hair and white teeth. A
     lively face, apparently. Earrings in his ears.

     'That's well. You are a traveller?'

     'Surely, sir.'

     'A stranger in this city?'

     'Surely, surely, altogether. I am arrived this unhappy evening.'

     'From what country?'

     'Marseilles.'

     'Why, see there! I also! Almost as much a stranger here as you, though
     born here, I came from Marseilles a little while ago. Don't be cast
     down.' The face looked up at him imploringly, as he rose from wiping it,
     and gently replaced the coat that covered the writhing figure. 'I won't
     leave you till you shall be well taken care of. Courage! You will be
     very much better half an hour hence.'

     'Ah! Altro, Altro!' cried the poor little man, in a faintly incredulous
     tone; and as they took him up, hung out his right hand to give the
     forefinger a back-handed shake in the air.

     Arthur Clennam turned; and walking beside the litter, and saying an
     encouraging word now and then, accompanied it to the neighbouring
     hospital of Saint Bartholomew. None of the crowd but the bearers and
     he being admitted, the disabled man was soon laid on a table in a cool,
     methodical way, and carefully examined by a surgeon who was as near at
     hand, and as ready to appear as Calamity herself. 'He hardly knows an
     English word,' said Clennam; 'is he badly hurt?'

     'Let us know all about it first,' said the surgeon, continuing his
     examination with a businesslike delight in it, 'before we pronounce.'

     After trying the leg with a finger, and two fingers, and one hand and
     two hands, and over and under, and up and down, and in this direction
     and in that, and approvingly remarking on the points of interest to
     another gentleman who joined him, the surgeon at last clapped the
     patient on the shoulder, and said, 'He won't hurt. He'll do very well.
     It's difficult enough, but we shall not want him to part with his leg
     this time.' Which Clennam interpreted to the patient, who was full of
     gratitude, and, in his demonstrative way, kissed both the interpreter's
     hand and the surgeon's several times.

     'It's a serious injury, I suppose?' said Clennam.

     'Ye-es,' replied the surgeon, with the thoughtful pleasure of an artist
     contemplating the work upon his easel. 'Yes, it's enough. There's a
     compound fracture above the knee, and a dislocation below. They are
     both of a beautiful kind.' He gave the patient a friendly clap on the
     shoulder again, as if he really felt that he was a very good fellow
     indeed, and worthy of all commendation for having broken his leg in a
     manner interesting to science.

     'He speaks French?' said the surgeon.

     'Oh yes, he speaks French.'

     'He'll be at no loss here, then.--You have only to bear a little pain
     like a brave fellow, my friend, and to be thankful that all goes as
     well as it does,' he added, in that tongue, 'and you'll walk again to
     a marvel. Now, let us see whether there's anything else the matter, and
     how our ribs are?'

     There was nothing else the matter, and our ribs were sound. Clennam
     remained until everything possible to be done had been skilfully and
     promptly done--the poor belated wanderer in a strange land movingly
     besought that favour of him--and lingered by the bed to which he was in
     due time removed, until he had fallen into a doze. Even then he wrote a
     few words for him on his card, with a promise to return to-morrow, and
     left it to be given to him when he should awake.

     All these proceedings occupied so long that it struck eleven o'clock at
     night as he came out at the Hospital Gate. He had hired a lodging for
     the present in Covent Garden, and he took the nearest way to that
     quarter, by Snow Hill and Holborn.

     Left to himself again, after the solicitude and compassion of his last
     adventure, he was naturally in a thoughtful mood. As naturally, he
     could not walk on thinking for ten minutes without recalling Flora.
     She necessarily recalled to him his life, with all its misdirection and
     little happiness.

     When he got to his lodging, he sat down before the dying fire, as he
     had stood at the window of his old room looking out upon the blackened
     forest of chimneys, and turned his gaze back upon the gloomy vista by
     which he had come to that stage in his existence. So long, so bare,
     so blank. No childhood; no youth, except for one remembrance; that one
     remembrance proved, only that day, to be a piece of folly.

     It was a misfortune to him, trifle as it might have been to another.
     For, while all that was hard and stern in his recollection, remained
     Reality on being proved--was obdurate to the sight and touch, and
     relaxed nothing of its old indomitable grimness--the one tender
     recollection of his experience would not bear the same test, and melted
     away. He had foreseen this, on the former night, when he had dreamed
     with waking eyes, but he had not felt it then; and he had now.

     He was a dreamer in such wise, because he was a man who had, deep-rooted
     in his nature, a belief in all the gentle and good things his life had
     been without. Bred in meanness and hard dealing, this had rescued him
     to be a man of honourable mind and open hand. Bred in coldness and
     severity, this had rescued him to have a warm and sympathetic heart.
     Bred in a creed too darkly audacious to pursue, through its process of
     reserving the making of man in the image of his Creator to the making of
     his Creator in the image of an erring man, this had rescued him to judge
     not, and in humility to be merciful, and have hope and charity.

     And this saved him still from the whimpering weakness and cruel
     selfishness of holding that because such a happiness or such a virtue
     had not come into his little path, or worked well for him, therefore
     it was not in the great scheme, but was reducible, when found in
     appearance, to the basest elements. A disappointed mind he had, but a
     mind too firm and healthy for such unwholesome air. Leaving himself in
     the dark, it could rise into the light, seeing it shine on others and
     hailing it.

     Therefore, he sat before his dying fire, sorrowful to think upon the way
     by which he had come to that night, yet not strewing poison on the way
     by which other men had come to it. That he should have missed so much,
     and at his time of life should look so far about him for any staff to
     bear him company upon his downward journey and cheer it, was a just
     regret. He looked at the fire from which the blaze departed, from which
     the afterglow subsided, in which the ashes turned grey, from which they
     dropped to dust, and thought, 'How soon I too shall pass through such
     changes, and be gone!'

     To review his life was like descending a green tree in fruit and flower,
     and seeing all the branches wither and drop off, one by one, as he came
     down towards them.

     'From the unhappy suppression of my youngest days, through the rigid and
     unloving home that followed them, through my departure, my long exile,
     my return, my mother's welcome, my intercourse with her since, down to
     the afternoon of this day with poor Flora,' said Arthur Clennam, 'what
     have I found!'

     His door was softly opened, and these spoken words startled him, and
     came as if they were an answer:

     'Little Dorrit.'




