SCENE I.

     _The Skirts of COUNT WINTERSEN'S Park.--The Park Gates in the
     centre.--On one side a low Lodge, among the Trees.--On the other,
     in the back ground, a Peasant's Hut._

     _Enter PETER._

_Pet._ Pooh! pooh!--never tell me.--I'm a clever lad, for all father's
crying out every minute, "Peter," and "stupid Peter!" But I say, Peter
is not stupid, though father will always be so wise. First, I talk too
much; then I talk too little; and if I talk a bit to myself, he calls me
a driveller. Now, I like best to talk to myself; for I never contradict
myself, and I don't laugh at myself, as other folks do. That laughing is
often a plaguy teazing custom. To be sure, when Mrs. Haller laughs, one
can bear it well enough; there is a sweetness even in her reproof, that
somehow--But, lud! I had near forgot what I was sent about.--Yes, then
they would have laughed at me indeed.--[_Draws a green purse from his
pocket._]--I am to carry this money to old Tobias; and Mrs. Haller said
I must be sure not to blab, or say that she had sent it. Well, well, she
may be easy for that matter; not a word shall drop from my lips. Mrs.
Haller is charming, but silly, if father is right; for father says, "He,
that spends his money is not wise," but "he that gives it away, is stark
mad."

     _Enter the STRANGER, from the Lodge, followed by FRANCIS.--At
     sight of PETER, the STRANGER stops, and looks suspiciously at
     him. PETER stands opposite to him, with his mouth wide open. At
     length he takes off his hat, scrapes a bow, and goes into the Hut._

_Stra._ Who is that?

_Fra._ The steward's son.

_Stra._ Of the Castle?

_Fra._ Yes.

_Stra._ [_After a pause._] You were--you were speaking last night--

_Fra._ Of the old countryman?

_Stra._ Ay.

_Fra._ You would not hear me out.

_Stra._ Proceed.

_Fra._ He is poor.

_Stra._ Who told you so?

_Fra._ Himself.

_Stra._ [_With acrimony._] Ay, ay; he knows how to tell his story, no
doubt.

_Fra._ And to impose, you think?

_Stra._ Right!

_Fra._ This man does not.

_Stra._ Fool!

_Fra._ A feeling fool is better than a cold sceptic.

_Stra._ False!

_Fra._ Charity begets gratitude.

_Stra._ False!

_Fra._ And blesses the giver more than the receiver.

_Stra._ True.

_Fra._ Well, sir. This countryman--

_Stra._ Has he complained to you?

_Fra._ Yes.

_Stra._ He, who is really unhappy, never complains. [_Pauses._] Francis,
you have had means of education beyond your lot in life, and hence you
are encouraged to attempt imposing on me:--but go on.

_Fra._ His only son has been taken from him.

_Stra._ Taken from him?

_Fra._ By the exigency of the times, for a soldier.

_Stra._ Ay!

_Fra._ The old man is poor.--

_Stra._ 'Tis likely.

_Fra._ Sick and forsaken.

_Stra._ I cannot help him.

_Fra._ Yes.

_Stra._ How?

_Fra._ By money. He may buy his son's release.

_Stra._ I'll see him myself.

_Fra._ Do so.

_Stra._ But if he is an impostor!

_Fra._ He is not.

_Stra._ In that hut?

_Fra._ In that hut. [_STRANGER goes into the Hut._] A good master,
though one almost loses the use of speech by living with him. A man kind
and clear--though I cannot understand him. He rails against the whole
world, and yet no beggar leaves his door unsatisfied. I have now lived
three years with him, and yet I know not who he is. A hater of society,
no doubt; but not by Providence intended to be so. Misanthropy in his
head, not in his heart.

     _Enter the STRANGER and PETER, from the Hut._

_Pet._ Pray walk on.

_Stra._ [_To FRANCIS._] Fool!

_Fra._ So soon returned!

_Stra._ What should I do there?

_Fra._ Did you not find it as I said?

_Stra._ This lad I found.

_Fra._ What has he to do with your charity?

_Stra._ The old man and he understand each other perfectly well.

_Fra._ How?

_Stra._ What were this boy and the countryman doing?

_Fra._ [_Smiling, and shaking his head._] Well, you shall hear. [_To
PETER._] Young man, what were you doing in that hut?

_Pet._ Doing!--Nothing.

_Fra._ Well, but you couldn't go there for nothing?

_Pet._ And why not, pray?--But I did go there for nothing, though.--Do
you think one must be paid for every thing?--If Mrs. Haller were to give
me but a smiling look, I'd jump up to my neck in the great pond for
nothing.

_Fra._ It seems then Mrs. Haller sent you?

_Pet._ Why, yes--But I'm not to talk about it.

_Fra._ Why so?

_Pet._ How should I know? "Look you," says Mrs. Haller, "Master Peter,
be so good as not to mention it to any body." [_With much consequence._]
"Master Peter, be so good"--Hi! hi! hi!--"Master Peter, be so"--Hi! hi!
hi!--

_Fra._ Oh! that is quite a different thing. Of course you must be silent
then.

_Pet._ I know that; and so I am too. For I told old Tobias--says I,
"Now, you're not to think as how Mrs. Haller sent the money; for I shall
not say a word about that as long as I live," says I.

_Fra._ There you were very right. Did you carry him much money?

_Pet._ I don't know; I didn't count it. It was in a bit of a green
purse. Mayhap it may be some little matter that she has scraped together
in the last fortnight.

_Fra._ And why just in the last fortnight?

_Pet._ Because, about a fortnight since, I carried him some money
before.

_Fra._ From Mrs. Haller?

_Pet._ Ay, sure; who else, think you? Father's not such a fool. He says
it is our bounden duty, as christians, to take care of our money, and
not give any thing away, especially in summer; for then, says he,
there's herbs and roots enough in conscience to satisfy all the
reasonable hungry poor. But I say father's wrong, and Mrs. Haller's
right.

_Fra._ Yes, yes.--But this Mrs. Haller seems a strange woman, Peter.

_Pet._ Ay, at times she is plaguy odd. Why, she'll sit, and cry you a
whole day through, without any one's knowing why.--Ay, and yet, somehow
or other, whenever she cries, I always cry too--without knowing why.

_Fra._ [_To the STRANGER._] Are you satisfied?

_Stra._ Rid me of that babbler.

_Fra._ Good day, Master Peter.

_Pet._ You're not going yet, are you?

_Fra._ Mrs. Haller will be waiting for an answer.

_Pet._ So she will. And I have another place or two to call at. [_Takes
off his hat to STRANGER._] Servant, sir!

_Stra._ Pshaw!--

_Pet._ Pshaw! What--he's angry. [_PETER turns to FRANCIS, in a half
whisper._] He's angry, I suppose, because he can get nothing out of me.

_Fra._ It almost seems so.

_Pet._ Ay, I'd have him to know I'm no blab.                    [_Exit._

_Fra._ Now, sir?

_Stra._ What do you want?

_Fra._ Were you not wrong, sir?

_Stra._ Hem! wrong!

_Fra._ Can you still doubt?

_Stra._ I'll hear no more! Who is this Mrs. Haller? Why do I always
follow her path? Go where I will, whenever I try to do good, she has
always been before me.

_Fra._ You should rejoice at that.

_Stra._ Rejoice!

_Fra._ Surely! That there are other good and charitable people in the
world beside yourself.

_Stra._ Oh, yes!

_Fra._ Why not seek to be acquainted with her? I saw her yesterday in
the garden up at the Castle. Mr. Solomon, the steward, says she has been
unwell, and confined to her room almost ever since we have been here.
But one would not think it, to look at her; for a more beautiful
creature I never saw.

_Stra._ So much the worse. Beauty is a mask.

_Fra._ In her it seems a mirror of the soul. Her charities--

_Stra._ Talk not to me of her charities. All women wish to be
conspicuous:--in town by their wit; in the country by their heart.

_Fra._ 'Tis immaterial in what way good is done.

_Stra._ No; 'tis not immaterial.

_Fra._ To this poor old man at least.

_Stra._ He needs no assistance of mine.

_Fra._ His most urgent wants indeed, Mrs. Haller has relieved; but
whether she has or could have given as much as would purchase liberty
for the son, the prop of his age--

_Stra._ Silence! I will not give him a doit! [_In a peevish tone._] You
interest yourself very warmly in his behalf. Perhaps you are to be a
sharer in the gift.

_Fra._ Sir, sir, that did not come from your heart.

_Stra._ [_Recollecting himself._] Forgive me!

_Fra._ Poor master! How must the world have used you, before it could
have instilled this hatred of mankind, this constant doubt of honesty
and virtue!

_Stra._ Leave me to myself!

                              [_Throws himself on a seat; takes from his
                                pocket "Zimmerman on Solitude," and
                                reads._

_Fra._ [_Aside, surveying him._] Again reading! Thus it is from morn to
night. To him nature has no beauty; life, no charm. For three years I
have never seen him smile. What will be his fate at last? Nothing
diverts him. Oh, if he would but attach himself to any living thing!
Were it an animal--for something man must love.

     _Enter TOBIAS, from the Hut._

_Tob._ Oh! how refreshing, after seven long weeks, to feel these warm
sun beams once again! Thanks! thanks! bounteous Heaven, for the joy I
taste.

                              [_Presses his cap between his hands, looks
                                up and prays.--The STRANGER observes him
                                attentively._

_Fra._ [_To the STRANGER.] This old man's share of earthly happiness
can be but little; yet mark how grateful he is for his portion of it.

_Stra._ Because, though old, he is but a child in the leading strings of
Hope.

_Fra._ Hope is the nurse of life.

_Stra._ And her cradle is the grave.

                                             [_TOBIAS replaces his cap._

_Fra._ I wish you joy. I am glad to see you are so much recovered.

_Tob._ Thank you. Heaven, and the assistance of a kind lady, have saved
me for another year or two.

_Fra._ How old are you, pray?

_Tob._ Seventy-six. To be sure I can expect but little joy before I die.
Yet, there is another, and a better world.

_Fra._ To the unfortunate, then, death is scarce an evil?

_Tob._ Am I so unfortunate? Do I not enjoy this glorious morning? Am I
not in health again! Believe me, sir, he, who, leaving the bed of
sickness, for the first time breathes the fresh pure air, is, at that
moment, the happiest of his Maker's creatures.

_Fra._ Yet 'tis a happiness that fails upon enjoyment.

_Tob._ True; but less so in old age. Some fifty years ago my father left
me this cottage. I was a strong lad; and took an honest wife. Heaven
blessed my farm with rich crops, and my marriage with five children.
This lasted nine or ten years. Two of my children died. I felt it
sorely. The land was afflicted with a famine. My wife assisted me in
supporting our family: but four years after, she left our dwelling for a
better place. And of my five children only one son remained. This was
blow upon blow. It was long before I regained my fortitude. At length
resignation and religion had their effect. I again attached myself to
life. My son grew, and helped me in my work. Now the state has called
him away to bear a musket. This is to me a loss indeed. I can work no
more. I am old and weak; and true it is, but for Mrs. Haller, I must
have perished.

_Fra._ Still then life has its charms for you?

_Tob._ Why not, while the world holds any thing that's dear to me? Have
not I a son?

_Fra._ Who knows, that you will ever see him more? He may be dead.

_Tob._ Alas! he may. But as long as I am not sure of it, he lives to me:
And if he falls, 'tis in his country's cause. Nay, should I lose him,
still I should not wish to die. Here is the hut in which I was born.
Here is the tree that grew with me; and, I am almost ashamed to confess
it--I have a dog, I love.

_Fra._ A dog!

_Tob._ Yes!--Smile if you please: but hear me. My benefactress once came
to my hut herself, some time before you fixed here. The poor animal,
unused to see the form of elegance and beauty enter the door of penury,
growled at her.--"I wonder you keep that surly, ugly animal, Mr.
Tobias," said she; "you, who have hardly food enough for
yourself."--"Ah, madam," I replied, "if I part with him, are you sure
that any thing else will love me?"--She was pleased with my answer.

_Fra._ [_To STRANGER._] Excuse me, sir; but I wish you had listened.

_Stra._ I have listened.

_Fra._ Then, sir, I wish you would follow this poor old man's example.

_Stra._ [_Pauses._] Here; take this book, and lay it on my desk.
[_Francis goes into the Lodge with the book._] How much has this Mrs.
Haller given you?

_Tob._ Oh, sir, she has given me so much, that I can look towards winter
without fear.

_Stra._ No more?

_Tob._ What could I do with more?--Ah! true; I might--

_Stra._ I know it.--You might buy your son's release.--There!

                             [_Presses a purse into his hand, and exit._

_Tob._ What is all this? [_Opens the purse, and finds it full of gold._]
Merciful Heaven!--

     _Enter FRANCIS._

--Now look, sir: is confidence in Heaven unrewarded?

_Fra._ I wish you joy! My master gave you this!

_Tob._ Yes, your noble master. Heaven reward him!

_Fra._ Just like him. He sent me with his book, that no one might be
witness to his bounty.

_Tob._ He would not even take my thanks. He was gone before I could
speak.

_Fra._ Just his way.

_Tob._ Now, I'll go as quick as these old legs will bear me. What a
delightful errand! I go to release my Robert! How the lad will rejoice!
There is a girl too, in the village, that will rejoice with him. O
Providence, how good art thou! Years of distress never can efface the
recollection of former happiness; but one joyful moment drives from the
memory an age of misery.                                        [_Exit._

_Fra._ [_Looks after him._] Why am I not wealthy? 'Sdeath! why am I not
a prince! I never thought myself envious; but I feel I am. Yes, I must
envy those who, with the will, have the power to do good.       [_Exit._

