SCENE II.

     _The Antichamber._

     _Enter CHARLOTTE._

_Char._ No, indeed, my lady! If you chuse to bury yourself in the
country, I shall take my leave. I am not calculated for a country life.
And, to sum up all, when I think of this Mrs. Haller--

     _Enter SOLOMON._

_Sol._ [_Overhearing her last words._] What of Mrs. Haller, my sweet
Miss?

_Char._ Why, Mr. Solomon, who is Mrs. Haller? You know every thing; you
hear every thing.

_Sol._ I have received no letters from any part of Europe on the
subject, Miss.

_Char._ But who is to blame? The Count and Countess. She dines with
them; and at this very moment is drinking tea with them. Is this proper?

_Sol._ By no means.

_Char._ Shouldn't a Count and a Countess, in all their actions, show a
certain degree of pride and pomposity?

_Sol._ To be sure! To be sure they should!

_Char._ No, I won't submit to it. I'll tell her ladyship, when I dress
her to-morrow, that either Mrs. Haller or I must quit the house.

_Sol._ [_Seeing the BARON._] St!

     _Enter BARON._

_Bar._ Didn't I hear Mrs. Haller's name here?

_Sol._ [_Confused._] Why--yes--we--we--

_Bar._ Charlotte, tell my sister I wish to see her as soon as the
tea-table is removed.

_Char._ [_Aside to SOLOMON._] Either she or I go, that I'm determined.

                                                                [_Exit._

_Bar._ May I ask what it was you were saying?

_Sol._ Why, please your Honourable Lordship, we were talking here and
there--this and that--

_Bar._ I almost begin to suspect some secret.

_Sol._ Secret! Heaven forbid! Mercy on us! No! I should have had letters
on the subject if there had been a secret.

_Bar._ Well then, since it was no secret, I presume I may know your
conversation.

_Sol._ You do us great honour, my lord. Why, then, at first, we were
making a few common-place observations. Miss Charlotte remarked that we
had all our faults. I said, "Yes." Soon after I remarked that the best
persons in the world were not without their weaknesses. She said, "Yes."

_Bar._ If you referred to Mrs. Haller's faults and weaknesses, I am
desirous to hear more.

_Sol._ Sure enough, sir, Mrs. Haller is an excellent woman; but she's
not an angel for all that. I am an old faithful servant to his
Excellency the Count, and therefore it is my duty to speak, when any
thing is done disadvantageous to his interest.

_Bar._ Well!

_Sol._ For instance, now; his Excellency may think he has at least some
score of dozens of the old six-and-twenty hock. Mercy on us! there are
not ten dozen bottles left; and not a drop has gone down my throat, I'll
swear.

_Bar._ [_Smiling._] Mrs. Haller has not drank it, I suppose?

_Sol._ Not she herself, for she never drinks wine. But if any body be
ill in the village, any poor woman lying-in, away goes a bottle of the
six-and-twenty! Innumerable are the times that I've reproved her; but
she always answers me snappishly, that she will be responsible for it.

_Bar._ So will I, Mr. Solomon.

_Sol._ Oh! with all my heart, your Honourable Lordship. It makes no
difference to me. I had the care of the cellar twenty years, and can
safely take my oath, that I never gave the poor a single drop in the
whole course of my trust.

_Bar._ How extraordinary is this woman!

_Sol._ Extraordinary! One can make nothing of her. To-day, the vicar's
wife is not good enough for her. To-morrow, you may see her sitting with
all the women of the village. To be sure she and I agree pretty well;
for, between me and your Honourable Lordship, she has cast an eye upon
my son Peter.

_Bar._ Has she?

_Sol._ Yes--Peter's no fool, I assure you. The schoolmaster is teaching
him to write. Would your Honourable Lordship please to see a specimen;
I'll go for his copy-book. He makes his pothooks capitally.

_Bar._ Another time, another time. Good bye for the present, Mr.
Solomon. [_SOLOMON bows, without attempting to go._] Good day, Mr.
Solomon.

_Sol._ [_Not understanding the hint._] Your Honourable Lordship's most
obedient servant.

_Bar._ Mr. Solomon I wish to be alone.

_Sol._ As your lordship commands. If the time should seem long in my
absence, and your lordship wishes to hear the newest news from the seat
of war, you need only send for old Solomon. I have letters from Leghorn,
Cape Horn, and every known part of the habitable globe.         [_Exit._

_Bar._ Tedious old fool! Yet hold. Did he not speak in praise of Mrs.
Haller? Pardoned be his rage for news and politics.

     _Enter COUNTESS._

Well, sister, have you spoken to her?

_Countess._ I have: and if you do not steer for another haven, you will
be doomed to drive upon the ocean for ever.

_Bar._ Is she married?

_Countess._ I don't know.

_Bar._ Is she of a good family?

_Countess._ I can't tell.

_Bar._ Does she dislike me?

_Countess._ Excuse my making a reply.

_Bar._ I thank you for your sisterly affection, and the explicitness of
your communications. Luckily, I placed little reliance on either; and
have found a friend, who will save your ladyship all further trouble.

_Countess._ A friend!

_Bar._ Yes. The Stranger who saved your son's life this morning proves
to be my intimate friend.

_Countess._ What's his name?

_Bar._ I don't know.

_Countess._ Is he of a good family?

_Bar._ I can't tell.

_Countess._ Will he come hither?

_Bar._ Excuse my making a reply.

_Countess._ Well, the retort is fair--but insufferable.

_Bar._ You can't object to the _Da Capo_ of your own composition,

     _Enter COUNT and MRS. HALLER._

_Count._ Zounds! do you think I am Xenocrates; or like the poor sultan
with marble legs? There you leave me _tete-a-tete_ with Mrs. Haller, as
if my heart were a mere flint. So you prevailed, brother. The Stranger
will come then, it seems.

_Bar._ I expect him every minute.

_Count._ I'm glad to hear it. One companion more, however. In the
country we never can have too many.

_Bar._ This gentleman will not exactly be an addition to your circle,
for he leaves this place tomorrow.

_Count._ But he won't, I think. Now, Lady Wintersen, summon all your
charms. There is no art in conquering us poor devils; but this strange
man, who does not care a doit for you all together, is worth your
efforts. Try your skill. I shan't be jealous.

_Countess._ I allow the conquest to be worth the trouble. But what Mrs.
Haller has not been able to affect in three months, ought not to be
attempted by me.

_Mrs. H._ [_Jocosely._] Oh, yes, madam. He has given me no opportunity
of trying the force of my charms, for I have never once happened to see
him.

_Count._ Then he's a blockhead; and you an idler.

_Sol._ [_Without._] This way, sir! This way!

     _Enter SOLOMON._

_Sol._ The Stranger begs leave to have the honour--

_Count._ Welcome! Welcome.                              [_Exit SOLOMON._

                              [_Turns to meet the STRANGER, whom he
                                conducts in by the hand._]

My dear sir--Lady Wintersen--Mrs. Haller--

                              [_MRS. HALLER, as soon as she sees the
                                STRANGER, shrieks, and swoons in the
                                arms of the BARON. The STRANGER casts a
                                look at her, and struck with
                                astonishment and horror, rushes out of
                                the room. The BARON and COUNTESS bear
                                MRS. HALLER off; COUNT following, in
                                great surprise._]

