SCENE I.

     _The Antichamber._

     _Enter BARON._

_Bar._ Oh! deceitful hope! Thou phantom of future happiness! To thee
have I stretched out my arms, and thou hast vanished into air! Wretched
Steinfort! The mystery is solved. She is the wife of my friend! I cannot
myself be happy; but I may, perhaps, be able to reunite two lovely
souls, whom cruel fate has severed. Ha! they are here. I must propose it
instantly.

     _Enter COUNTESS and MRS. HALLER._

_Countess._ Into the garden, my dear friend! Into the air!

_Mrs. H._ I am quite well. Do not alarm yourselves on my account.

_Bar._ Madam, pardon my intrusion; but to lose a moment may be fatal. He
means to quit the country to-morrow. We must devise means to reconcile
you to--the Stranger.

_Mrs. H._ How, my lord! You seem acquainted with my history?

_Bar._ I am. Walbourg has been my friend ever since we were boys. We
served together from the rank of cadet. We have been separated seven
years. Chance brought us this day together, and his heart was open to
me.

_Mrs. H._ Now do I feel what it is to be in the presence of an honest
man, when I dare not meet his eye.                    [_Hides her face._

_Bar._ If sincere repentance, if years without reproach, do not give us
a title to man's forgiveness, what must we expect hereafter? No, lovely
penitent! your contrition is complete. Error for a moment wrested from
slumbering virtue the dominion of your heart; but she awoke, and, with a
look, banished her enemy for ever. I know my friend. He has the firmness
of a man; but, with it, the gentlest feelings of your sex. I hasten to
him. With the fire of pure disinterested friendship will I enter on this
work; that, when I look back upon my past life, I may derive from this
good action consolation in disappointment, and even resignation in
despair.                                                       [_Going._

_Mrs. H._ Oh, stay! What would you do? No! never! My husband's honour is
sacred to me. I love him unutterably: but never, never can I be his wife
again; even if he were generous enough to pardon me.

_Bar._ Madam! Can you, Countess, be serious?

_Mrs H._ Not that title, I beseech you! I am not a child, who wishes to
avoid deserved punishment. What were my penitence, if I hoped advantage
from it beyond the consciousness of atonement for past offence?

_Countess._ But if your husband himself--?

_Mrs. H._ Oh! he will not! he cannot! And let him rest assured I never
would replace my honour at the expense of his.

_Bar._ He still loves you.

_Mrs. H._ Loves me! Then he must not--No--he must purify his heart from
a weakness which would degrade him!

_Bar._ Incomparable woman! I go to my friend--perhaps, for the last
time! Have you not one word to send him?

_Mrs. H._ Yes, I have two requests to make. Often when, in excess of
grief, I have despaired of every consolation, I have thought I should be
easier if I might behold my husband once again, acknowledge my injustice
to him, and take a gentle leave of him for ever. This, therefore, is my
first request--a conversation for a few short minutes, if he does not
quite abhor the sight of me. My second request is--Oh--not to see, but
to hear some account of my poor children.

_Bar._ If humanity and friendship can avail, he will not for a moment
delay your wishes.

_Countess._ Heaven be with you.

_Mrs. H._ And my prayers.                                 [_Exit BARON._

_Countess._ Come, my friend, come into the air, till he returns with
hope and consolation.

_Mrs. H._ Oh, my heart! How art thou afflicted! My husband! My little
ones! Past joys and future fears--Oh, dearest madam, there are moments
in which we live years! Moments, which steal the roses from the cheek
of health, and plough deep furrows in the brow of youth.

_Countess._ Banish these sad reflections. Come, let us walk. The sun
will set soon; let nature's beauties dissipate anxiety.

_Mrs. H._ Alas! Yes, the setting sun is a proper scene for me.

_Countess._ Never forget a morning will succeed.              [_Exeunt._

