SCENE II.

     _The Lawn._

     _SOLOMON and PETER are discovered arranging the TENANTRY.--Rural
     music._

     _Enter COUNT and COUNTESS WINTERSEN, (the latter leading her
     Child,) the BARON, MRS. HALLER, CHARLOTTE, and SERVANTS following._

_Sol._ Welcome, ten thousand welcomes, your Excellencies. Some little
preparation made for welcome too. But that will be seen anon.

_Count._ Well! here we are! Heaven bless our advance and retreat! Mrs.
Haller, I bring you an invalid, who in future will swear to no flag but
yours.

_Mrs. H._ Mine flies for retreat and rural happiness.

_Count._ But not without retreating graces, and retiring cupids too.

_Countess._ [_Who has in the mean time kindly embraced MRS. HALLER,
and by her been welcomed to Wintersen._] My dear Count, you forget that
I am present.

_Count._ Why, in the name of chivalry, how can I do less than your
gallant brother, the Baron? who has been so kind as nearly to kill my
four greys, in order to be here five minutes before me.

_Bar._ Had I known all the charms of this place, you should have said so
with justice.

_Countess._ Don't you think William much grown?

_Mrs. H._ The sweet boy!

                              [_Stoops to kiss him, and deep melancholy
                                overshadows her countenance._

_Count._ Well, Solomon, you've provided a good dinner?

_Sol._ As good as haste would allow, please your Right Honourable
Excellency!

_Pet._ Yes, as good as--     [_COUNT goes aside with SOLOMON and PETER._

_Bar._ Tell me, I conjure you, sister, what jewel you have thus buried
in the country?

_Countess._ Ha! ha! ha! What, brother, you caught at last?

_Bar._ Answer me.

_Countess._ Well, her name is Mrs. Haller.

_Bar._ That I know; but--

_Countess._ But!--but I know no more myself.

_Bar._ Jesting apart, I wish to know.

_Countess._ And, jesting apart, I wish you would not plague me. I have
at least a hundred thousand important things to do. Heavens! the vicar
may come to pay his respects to me before I have been at my toilet; of
course I must consult my looking-glass on the occasion. Come, William,
will you help to dress me, or stay with your father?

_Count._ We'll take care of him.

_Countess._ Come, Mrs. Haller.

                          [_Exit with MRS. HALLER, CHARLOTTE following._

_Bar._ [_Aside, and going._] I am in a very singular humour.

_Count._ Whither so fast, good brother?

_Bar._ To my apartment: I have letters to--I--

_Count._ Pshaw! stay. Let us take a turn in the park together.

_Bar._ Excuse me. I am not perfectly well. I should be but bad company.
I--                                     [_Exit.--The_ TENANTRY _retire._

_Count._ Well, Solomon, you are as great a fool as ever, I see.

_Sol._ Ha! ha! At your Right Honourable Excellency's service.

_Count._ [_Points to PETER._] Who is that ape in the corner?

_Sol._ Ape!--Oh! that is--with respect to your Excellency be it
spoken--the son of my body; by name, Peter.               [_PETER bows._

_Count._ So, so! Well, how goes all on?

_Sol._ Well and good; well and good. Your Excellency will see how I've
improved the park: You'll not know it again. A hermitage here;
serpentine walks there; an obelisk; a ruin; and all so sparingly, all
done with the most economical economy.

_Count._ Well, I'll have a peep at your obelisk and ruins, while they
prepare for dinner!

_Sol._ I have already ordered it, and will have the honour of attending
your Right Honourable Excellency.

_Count._ Come, lead the way. Peter, attend your young master to the
house; we must not tire him.              [_Exit, conducted by SOLOMON._

_Pet._ We'll go round this way, your little Excellency, and then we
shall see the bridge as we go by; and the new boat, with all the fine
ribbands and streamers. This way, your little Excellency.

                                             [_Exit, leading the Child._

