SCENE I.

     _The Skirts of the Park and Lodge, &c. as before. The STRANGER is
     discovered on a seat, reading._

     _Enter FRANCIS._

_Fra._ Sir, sir, dinner is ready.

_Stra._ I want no dinner.

_Fra._ I've got something good.

_Stra._ Eat it yourself.

_Fra._ You are not hungry?

_Stra._ No.                                                    [_Rises._

_Fra._ Nor I. The heat takes away all appetite.

_Stra._ Yes.

_Fra._ I'll put it by; perhaps at night--

_Stra._ Perhaps.

_Fra._ Dear sir, dare I speak?

_Stra._ Speak.

_Fra._ You have done a noble action.

_Stra._ What?

_Fra._ You have saved a fellow creature's life.

_Stra._ Peace.

_Fra._ Do you know who he was?

_Stra._ No.

_Fra._ The only son of Count Wintersen.

_Stra._ Immaterial.

_Fra._ A gentleman, by report, worthy and benevolent as yourself.

_Stra._ [_Angry._] Silence! Dare you flatter me?

_Fra._ As I look to Heaven for mercy, I speak from my heart. When I
observe how you are doing good around you, how you are making every
individual's wants your own, and are yet yourself unhappy, alas! my
heart bleeds for you.

_Stra._ I thank you, Francis. I can only thank you. Yet share this
consolation with me:--my sufferings are unmerited.

_Fra._ My poor master!

_Stra._ Have you forgotten what the old man said this morning? "There is
another and a better world!" Oh, 'twas true. Then let us hope with
fervency, and yet endure with patience!--What's here?

     _Enter CHARLOTTE, from the Park gate._

_Char._ I presume, sir, you are the strange gentleman that drew my young
master out of the water?--[_The STRANGER reads._] Or [_To FRANCIS._] are
you he? [_FRANCIS makes a wry face._] Are the creatures both dumb?
[_Looks at them by turns._] Surely, old Solomon has fixed two statues
here, by way of ornament; for of any use there is no sign. [_Approaches
FRANCIS._] No, this is alive, and breathes; yes, and moves its eyes.
[_Bawls in his ear._] Good friend!

_Fra._ I'm not deaf.

_Char._ No, nor dumb, I perceive at last.--Is yon lifeless thing your
master?

_Fra._ That honest silent gentleman is my master.

_Char._ The same that drew the young Count out of the water?

_Fra._ The same.

_Char._ [_To the STRANGER._] Sir, my master and mistress, the Count and
Countess, present their respectful compliments, and request the honour
of your company at a family supper this evening.

_Stra._ I shall not come.

_Char._ But you'll scarce send such an uncivil answer as this. The Count
is overpowered with gratitude. You saved his son's life.

_Stra._ I did it willingly.

_Char._ And won't accept of, "I thank you," in return?

_Stra._ No.

_Char._ You really are cruel, sir, I must tell you. There are three of
us ladies at the Castle, and we are all dying with curiosity to know who
you are. [_Exit STRANGER._] The master is crabbed enough, however. Let
me try what I can make of the man. Pray, sir-- [_FRANCIS turns his back
to her._] --The beginning promises little enough. Friend, why won't you
look at me.

_Fra._ I like to look at green trees better than green eyes.

_Char._ Green eyes, you monster! Who told you, that my eyes were green?
Let me tell you there have been sonnets made on my eyes, before now.

_Fra._ Glad to hear it.

_Char._ To the point then at once. What is your master?

_Fra._ A man.

_Char._ I surmised as much. But what's his name?

_Fra._ The same as his father's.

_Char._ Not unlikely;--and his father was--

_Fra._ Married.

_Char._ To whom?

_Fra._ To a woman.

_Char._ [_Enraged._] I'll tell you what; who your master is I see I
shall not learn, and I don't care; but I know what you are.

_Fra._ Well, what am I?

_Char._ A bear!                                                 [_Exit._

_Fra._ Thank you! Now to see how habit and example corrupt one's
manners. I am naturally the civilest spoken fellow in the world to the
pretty prattling rogues; yet, following my master's humour, I've rudely
driven this wench away. I must have a peep at her though.
                                       [_Looking towards the Park gate._

     _Enter STRANGER._

_Stra._ Is that woman gone?

_Fra._ Yes.

_Stra._ Francis!

_Fra._ Sir.

_Stra._ We must be gone too.

_Fra._ But whither?

_Stra._ I don't care.

_Fra._ I'll attend you.

_Stra._ To any place?

_Fra._ To death.

_Stra._ Heav'n grant it--to me, at least! There is peace.

_Fra._ Peace is every where. Let the storm rage without, if the heart be
but at rest. Yet I think we are very well where we are: the situation is
inviting; and nature lavish of her beauties, and of her bounties too.

_Stra._ But I am not a wild beast, to be stared at, and sent for as a
show. Is it fit I should be?

_Fra._ Another of your interpretations! That a man, the life of whose
only son you have saved, should invite you to his house, seems to me not
very unnatural.

_Stra._ I will not be invited to any house.

_Fra._ For once, methinks, you might submit. You'll not be asked a
second time.

_Stra._ Proud wretches! They believe the most essential service is
requited, if one may but have the honour of sitting at their table. Let
us begone.

_Fra._ Yet hold, sir! This bustle will soon be over. Used to the town,
the Count and his party will soon be tired of simple nature, and you
will again be freed from observation.

_Stra._ Not from your's.

_Fra._ This is too much. Do I deserve your doubts?

_Stra._ Am I in the wrong?

_Fra._ You are indeed!

_Stra._ Francis, my servant, you are my only friend.

_Fra._ That title makes amends for all.

_Stra._ But look, Francis; there are uniforms and gay dresses in the
walk again. No, I must be gone. Here I'll stay no longer.

_Fra._ Well then, I'll tie up my bundle.

_Stra._ The sooner the better! They come this way. Now must I shut
myself in my hovel, and lose this fine breeze. Nay, if they be your
highbred class of all, they may have impudence enough to walk into my
chamber. Francis, I shall lock the door.

                              [_Goes into the Lodge, locks the door, and
                                fastens the shutters._

_Fra._ And I'll be your centinel.

_Stra._ Very well.

_Fra._ Now should these people be as inquisitive as their maid, I must
summon my whole stock of impertinence. But their questions and my
answers need little study. They can learn nothing of the Stranger from
me; for the best of all possible reasons--I know nothing myself.

     _Enter BARON and COUNTESS._

_Countess._ There is a strange face. The servant probably.

_Bar._ Friend, can we speak to your master?

_Fra._ No.

_Bar._ Only for a few minutes.

_Fra._ He has locked himself in his room.

_Countess._ Tell him a lady waits for him.

_Fra._ Then he's sure not to come.

_Countess._ Does he hate our sex?

_Fra._ He hates the whole human race, but woman particularly.

_Countess._ And why?

_Fra._ He may perhaps have been deceived.

_Countess._ This is not very courteous.

_Fra._ My master is not over courteous: but when he sees a chance of
saving a fellow creature's life, he'll attempt it at the hazard of his
own.

_Bar._ You are right. Now hear the reason of our visit. The wife and
brother-in-law of the man, whose child your master has saved, wish to
acknowledge their obligations to him.

_Fra._ That he dislikes. He only wishes to live unnoticed.

_Countess._ He appears to be unfortunate.

_Fra._ Appears!

_Countess._ An affair of honour, perhaps, or some unhappy attachment may
have--

_Fra._ They may.

_Countess._ Be this as it may, I wish to know who he is.

_Fra._ So do I.

_Countess._ What! don't you know him yourself?

_Fra._ Oh! I know him well enough. I mean his real self--His heart--his
soul--his worth--his honour!--Perhaps you think one knows a man, when
one is acquainted with his name and person.

_Countess._ 'Tis well said, friend; you please me much. And now I should
like to know you. Who are you?

_Fra._ Your humble servant.                                     [_Exit._

_Countess._ This is affectation! A desire to appear singular! Every one
wishes to make himself distinguished. One sails round the world; another
creeps into a hovel.

_Bar._ And the man apes his master!

_Countess._ Come, brother, let us seek the Count. He and Mrs. Haller
turned into the lawn--                                         [_Going._

_Bar._ Stay. First a word or two, sister. I am in love.

_Countess._ For the hundreth time.

_Bar._ For the first time in my life.

_Countess._ I wish you joy.

_Bar._ Till now you have evaded my inquiries. Who is she? I beseech you,
sister, be serious. There is a time for all things.

_Countess._ Bless us! Why you look as if you were going to raise a
spirit. Don't fix your eyes so earnestly. Well, if I am to be serious, I
obey. I do not know who Mrs. Haller is, as I have already told you; but
what I do know of her, shall not be concealed from you. It may now be
three years ago, when, one evening, about twilight, a lady was
announced, who wished to speak to me in private. Mrs. Haller appeared
with all that grace and modesty, which have enchanted you. Her features,
at that moment, bore keener marks of the sorrow and confusion which have
since settled into gentle melancholy. She threw herself at my feet; and
besought me to save a wretch who was on the brink of despair. She told
me she had heard much of my benevolence, and offered herself as a
servant to attend me. I endeavoured to dive into the cause of her
sufferings, but in vain. She concealed her secret; yet opened to me more
and more each day a heart, chosen by virtue as her temple, and an
understanding improved by the most refined attainments. She no longer
remained my servant, but became my friend; and, by her own desire, has
ever since resided here. [_Curtseying._] Brother, I have done.

_Bar._ Too little to satisfy my curiosity; yet enough to make me realise
my project. Sister, lend me your aid--I would marry her.

_Countess._ You!

_Bar._ I.

_Countess._ Baron Steinfort.

_Bar._ For shame! If I understand you!

_Countess._ Not so harsh, and not so hasty! Those great sentiments of
contempt of inequality in rank are very fine in a romance; but we happen
not to be inhabitants of an ideal world. How could you introduce her to
the circle we live in? You surely would not attempt to present her to--

_Bar._ Object as you will--my answer is--_I love._ Sister, you see a man
before you, who--

_Countess._ Who wants a wife.

_Bar._ No; who has deliberately poised advantage against disadvantage;
domestic ease and comfort against the false gaieties of fashion. I can
withdraw into the country. I need no honours to make my tenants happy;
and my heart will teach me to make their happiness my own. With such a
wife as this, children who resemble her, and fortune enough to spread
comfort around me, what would the soul of man have more?

_Countess._ This is all vastly fine. I admire your plan; only you seem
to have forgotten one trifling circumstance.

_Bar._ And that is--

_Countess._ Whether Mrs. Haller will have you or not.

_Bar._ There, sister, I just want your assistance.--[_Seizing her
hand._] Good Henrietta!

_Countess._ Well, here's my hand. I'll do all I can for you. St!--We had
near been overheard. They are coming. Be patient and obedient.

     _Enter COUNT, and MRS. HALLER, leaning on his arm._

_Count._ Upon my word, Mrs. Haller, you are a nimble walker: I should be
sorry to run a race with you.

_Mrs. H._ Custom, my lord. You need only take the same walk every day
for a month.

_Count._ Yes; if I wanted to resemble my greyhounds.--But what said the
Stranger?

_Countess._ He gave Charlotte a flat refusal; and you see his door, and
even his shutters, are closed against us.

_Count._ What an unaccountable being! But it won't do. I must show my
gratitude one way or other. Steinfort, we will take the ladies home, and
then you shall try once again to see him. You can talk to these oddities
better than I can.

_Bar._ If you wish it, with all my heart.

_Count._ Thank you, thank you. Come, ladies: come Mrs. Haller.

                                                              [_Exeunt._
