SCENE II.

     _A close walk in the Garden._

     _Enter COUNTESS, and MRS. HALLER._

_Countess._ Well, Mrs. Haller, how do you like the man that just now
left us?

_Mrs. H._ Who?

_Countess._ My brother.

_Mrs. H._ He deserves to be your brother.

_Countess._ [_Curtseying._] Your most obedient! That shall be written in
my pocket-book.

_Mrs. H._ Without flattery then, madam, he appears to be most amiable.

_Countess._ Good!--And a handsome man?

_Mrs. H._ [_With indifference._] Oh, yes.

_Countess._ "Oh, yes!" It sounded almost like, "Oh, no!" But I must tell
you, that he looks upon you to be a handsome woman [_MRS. HALLER
smiles._] You make no reply to this?

_Mrs. H._ What shall I reply? Derision never fell from your lips; and I
am little calculated to support it.

_Countess._ As little as you are calculated to be the cause of it. No; I
was in earnest.--Now?

_Mrs. H._ You confuse me!--But why should I play the prude? I will own
there was a time, when I thought myself handsome. 'Tis past. Alas! the
enchanting beauties of a female countenance arise from peace of
mind--The look, which captivates an honourable man, must be reflected
from a noble soul.

_Countess._ Then Heaven grant my bosom may ever hold as pure a heart, as
now those eyes bear witness lives in yours!

_Mrs. H._ [_With sudden wildness._] Oh! Heaven forbid!

_Countess._ [_Astonished._] How!

_Mrs. H._ [_Checking her tears._] Spare me! I am a wretch. The
sufferings of three years can give me no claim to your friendship--No,
not even to your compassion. Oh! spare me!                     [_Going._

_Countess._ Stay, Mrs. Haller. For the first time, I beg your
confidence.--My brother loves you.

_Mrs. H._ [_Starting, and gazing full in the face of the COUNTESS._] For
mirth, too much--for earnest, too mournful!

_Countess._ I revere that modest blush. Discover to me who you are. You
risk nothing. Pour all your griefs into a sister's bosom. Am I not kind?
and can I not be silent?

_Mrs. H._ Alas! But a frank reliance on a generous mind is the greatest
sacrifice to be offered by true repentance. This sacrifice I will offer.
[_Hesitating._] Did you never hear--Pardon me--Did you never hear--Oh!
how shocking is it to unmask a deception, which alone has recommended me
to your regard! But it must be so.--Madam--Fie, Adelaide! does pride
become you? Did you never hear of the Countess Waldbourg?

_Countess._ I think I did hear, at the neighbouring court, of such a
creature. She plunged an honourable husband into misery. She ran away
with a villain.

_Mrs. H._ She did indeed. [_Falls at the feet of the COUNTESS._] Do not
cast me from you.

_Countess._ For Heaven's sake! You are--

_Mrs. H._ I am that wretch.

_Countess._ [_Turning from her with horror._] Ha!--Begone! [_Going. Her
heart draws her back._] Yet, she is unfortunate: she is unfriended! Her
image is repentance--Her life the proof--She has wept her fault in her
three years agony. Be still awhile, remorseless prejudice, and let the
genuine feelings of my soul avow--they do not truly honour virtue, who
can insult the erring heart that would return to her sanctuary.
[_Looking with sorrow on her._] Rise, I beseech you, rise! My husband
and my brother may surprise us. I promise to be silent.

                                                         [_Raising her._

_Mrs. H._ Yes, you will be silent--But, oh! conscience! conscience! thou
never wilt be silent. [_Clasping her hands._] Do not cast me from you.

_Countess._ Never! Your lonely life, your silent anguish and contrition,
may at length atone your crime. And never shall you want an asylum,
where your penitence may lament your loss. Your crime was youth and
inexperience; your heart never was, never could be concerned in it.

_Mrs. H._ Oh! spare me! My conscience never martyrs me so horribly, as
when I catch my base thoughts in search of an excuse! No, nothing can
palliate my guilt; and the only just consolation left me, is, to acquit
the man I wronged, and own I erred without a cause of fair complaint.

_Countess._ And this is the mark of true repentance. Alas! my friend,
when superior sense, recommended too by superior charms of person,
assail a young, though wedded--

_Mrs. H._ Ah! not even that mean excuse is left me. In all that merits
admiration, respect, and love, he was far, far beneath my husband. But
to attempt to account for my strange infatuation--I cannot bear it. I
thought my husband's manner grew colder to me. 'Tis true I knew, that
his expenses, and his confidence in deceitful friends, had embarrassed
his means, and clouded his spirits; yet I thought he denied me pleasures
and amusements still within our reach. My vanity was mortified! My
confidence not courted. The serpent tongue of my seducer promised every
thing. But never could such arguments avail, till, assisted by forged
letters, and the treachery of a servant, whom I most confided in, he
fixed my belief that my lord was false, and that all the coldness I
complained of was disgust to me, and love for another; all his home
retrenchments but the means of satisfying a rival's luxury. Maddened
with this conviction, (conviction it was, for artifice was most
ingenious in its proof,) I left my children--father--husband--to
follow--a villain.

_Countess._ But, with such a heart, my friend could not remain long in
her delusion?

_Mrs. H._ Long enough to make sufficient penitence impossible. 'Tis true
that in a few weeks the delirium was at an end. Oh, what were my
sensations when the mist dispersed before my eyes? I called for my
husband, but in vain!--I listened for the prattle of my children, but in
vain!

_Countess._ [_Embracing her._] Here, here, on this bosom only shall your
future tears be shed; and may I, dear sufferer, make you again familiar
with hope!

_Mrs. H._ Oh! impossible!

_Countess._ Have you never heard of your children?

_Mrs. H._ Never.

_Countess._ We must endeavour to gain some account of them. We
must--Hold! my husband and my brother! Oh, my poor brother! I had quite
forgotten him. Quick, dear Mrs. Haller, wipe your eyes. Let us meet
them.

_Mrs. H._ Madam, I'll follow. Allow me a moment to compose
myself.--[_Exit COUNTESS._] I pause!--Oh! yes--to compose myself!
[_Ironically._] She little thinks it is but to gain one solitary moment
to vent my soul's remorse. Once the purpose of my unsettled mind was
self-destruction; Heaven knows how I have sued for hope and resignation.
I did trust my prayers were heard--Oh! spare me further trial! I feel, I
feel, my heart and brain can bear no more.                      [_Exit._


