SCENE I.

     _The Skirts of the Park, Lodge, &c. as before.--A Table, spread
     with Fruits, &c._

     _FRANCIS discovered placing the supper._

_Fra._ I know he loves to have his early supper in the fresh air; and,
while he sups, not that I believe any thing can amuse him, yet I will
try my little Savoyards' pretty voices. I have heard him speak as if he
had loved music. [_Music without._] Oh, here they are.

     _Enter ANNETTE and CLAUDINE, playing on their guitars._

Ann.   _To welcome mirth and harmless glee,_
       _We rambling minstrels, blythe and free,_
       _With song the laughing hours beguile,_
       _And wear a never-fading smile:_
           _Where'er we roam_
           _We find a home,_
       _And greeting, to reward our toil._

Clau.  _No anxious griefs disturb our rest,_
       _Nor busy cares annoy our breast;_
       _Fearless we sink in soft repose,_
       _While night her sable mantle throws._
           _With grateful lay,_
           _Hail rising day,_
       _That rosy health and peace bestows._

     _During the Duet, the STRANGER looks from the Lodge window, and at
     the conclusion he comes out._

_Stra._ What mummery is this?

_Fra._ I hoped it might amuse you, sir.

_Stra._ Amuse _me_--fool!

_Fra._ Well then, I wished to amuse myself a little. I don't think my
recreations are so very numerous.

_Stra._ That's true, my poor fellow; indeed they are not. Let them go
on.--I'll listen.

_Fra._ But to please you, poor master, I fear it must be a sadder
strain. Annette, have you none but these cheerful songs?

_Ann._ O, plenty. If you are dolefully given we can be as sad as night.
I'll sing you an air Mrs. Haller taught me the first year she came to
the Castle.

_Fra._ Mrs. Haller! I should like to hear that.

Ann. _I have a silent sorrow here,_
       _A grief I'll ne'er impart;_
     _It breathes no sigh, it sheds no tear,_
       _But it consumes my heart;_
     _This cherish'd woe, this lov'd despair,_
       _My lot for ever be,_
     _So, my soul's lord, the pangs I bear_
       _Be never known by thee!_

     _And when pale characters of death_
       _Shall mark this alter'd cheek,_
     _When my poor wasted trembling breath_
       _My life's last hope would speak;_
     _I shall not raise my eyes to Heav'n,_
       _Nor mercy ask for me,_
     _My soul despairs to be forgiv'n,_
       _Unpardon'd, love, by thee._

_Stra._ [_Surprised and moved._] Oh! I have heard that air before, but
'twas with other words. Francis, share our supper with your friends--I
need none.                                          [_Enters the Lodge._

_Fra._ So I feared. Well, my pretty favourites, here are refreshments.
So, disturbed again. Now will this gentleman call for more music, and
make my master mad. Return when you observe this man is gone.--[_Exeunt
ANNETTE and CLAUDINE.--FRANCIS sits and eats._]--I was in hopes, that I
might at least eat my supper peaceably in the open air; but they follow
at our heels like blood-hounds.

     _Enter BARON._

_Bar._ My good friend, I must speak to your master.

_Fra._ Can't serve you.

_Bar._ Why not?

_Fra._ It's forbidden.

_Bar._ [_Offers money._] There! announce me.

_Fra._ Want no money.

_Bar._ Well, only announce me then.

_Fra._ I will announce you, sir; but it won't avail! I shall be abused,
and you rejected. However, we can but try.                     [_Going._

_Bar._ I only ask half a minute. [_FRANCIS goes into the Lodge._] But
when he comes, how am I to treat him? I never encountered a misanthrope
before. I have heard of instructions as to conduct in society; but how I
am to behave towards a being who loathes the whole world, and his own
existence, I have never learned.

     _Enter the STRANGER._

_Stra._ Now; what's your will?

_Bar._ I beg pardon, sir, for--[_Suddenly recognizing him._] Charles!

_Stra._ Steinfort!                                      [_They embrace._

_Bar._ Is it really you, my dear friend?

_Stra._ It is.

_Bar._ Merciful Heavens! How you are altered!

_Stra._ The hand of misery lies heavy on me.--But how came you here?
What want you?

_Bar._ Strange! Here was I ruminating how to address this mysterious
recluse: he appears, and proves to be my old and dearest friend.

_Stra._ Then you were not in search of me, nor knew that I lived here?

_Bar._ As little as I know who lives on the summit of Caucasus. You this
morning saved the life of my brother-in-law's only son: a grateful
family wishes to behold you in its circle. You refused my sister's
messenger; therefore, to give more weight to the invitation, I was
deputed to be the bearer of it. And thus has fortune restored to me a
friend, whom my heart has so long missed, and whom my heart just now so
much requires.

_Stra._ Yes, I am your friend; your sincere friend. You are a true man;
an uncommon man. Towards you my heart is still the same. But if this
assurance be of any value to you--go--leave me--and return no more.

_Bar._ Stay! All that I see and hear of you is inexplicable. 'Tis you;
but these, alas! are not the features which once enchanted every female
bosom, beamed gaiety through all society, and won you friends before
your lips were opened! Why do you avert your face? Is the sight of a
friend become hateful? Or, do you fear, that I should read in your eye
what passes in your soul? Where is that open look of fire, which at once
penetrated into every heart, and revealed your own?

_Stra._ [_With asperity._] My look penetrate into every heart!--Ha! ha!
ha!

_Bar._ Oh, Heavens! Rather may I never hear you laugh than in such a
tone!--For Heaven's sake tell me, Charles! tell me, I conjure you, what
has happened to you?

_Stra._ Things that happen every day; occurrences heard of in every
street. Steinfort, if I am not to hate you, ask me not another question.
If I am to love you, leave me.

_Bar._ Oh, Charles! awake the faded ideas of past joys. Feel, that a
friend is near. Recollect the days we passed in Hungary, when we
wandered arm in arm upon the banks of the Danube, while nature opened
our hearts, and made us enamoured of benevolence and friendship. In
those blessed moments you gave me this seal as a pledge of your regard.
Do you remember it?

_Stra._ Yes.

_Bar._ Am I since that time become less worthy of your confidence?

_Stra._ No!

_Bar._ Charles! it grieves me that I am thus compelled to enforce my
rights upon you. Do you know this scar?

_Stra._ Comrade! Friend! It received and resisted the stroke aimed at
my life. I have not forgotten it. Alas! you knew not what a present you
then made me.

_Bar._ Speak then, I beseech you.

_Stra._ You cannot help me.

_Bar._ Then I can mourn with you.

_Stra._ That I hate. Besides, I cannot weep.

_Bar._ Then give me words instead of tears. Both relieve the heart.

_Stra._ Relieve the heart! My heart is like a close-shut sepulchre. Let
what is within it, moulder and decay.--Why, why open the wretched
charnel-house to spread a pestilence around?

_Bar._ How horrid are your looks! For shame! A man like you thus to
crouch beneath the chance of fortune!

_Stra._ Steinfort! I did think, that the opinion of all mankind was
alike indifferent to me; but I feel that it is not so. My friend, you
shall not quit me without learning how I have been robbed of every joy
which life afforded. Listen: much misery may be contained in a few
words. Attracted by my native country, I quitted you and the service.
What pleasing pictures did I draw of a life employed in improving
society, and diffusing happiness! I fixed on Cassel to be my abode. All
went on admirably. I found friends. At length, too, I found a wife; a
lovely, innocent creature, scarce sixteen years of age. Oh! how I loved
her! She bore me a son and a daughter. Both were endowed by nature with
the beauty of their mother. Ask me not how I loved my wife and children!
Yes, then, then I was really happy. [_Wiping his eyes._] Ha! a tear! I
could not have believed it. Welcome, old friends! 'Tis long since we
have known each other. Well, my story is nearly ended. One of my
friends, for whom I had become engaged, treacherously lost me more than
half my fortune. This hurt me. I was obliged to retrench my expenses.
Contentment needs but little. I forgave him. Another friend--a villain!
to whom I was attached heart and soul; whom I had assisted with my
means, and promoted by my interest, this fiend! seduced my wife, and
bore her from me. Tell me, sir, is this enough to justify my hatred of
mankind, and palliate my seclusion from the
world?--Kings--laws--tyranny--or guilt can but imprison me, or kill me.
But, O God! O God! Oh! what are chains or death compared to the tortures
of a deceived yet doting husband!

_Bar._ To lament the loss of a faithless wife is madness.

_Stra._ Call it what you please--say what you please--I love her still.

_Bar._ And where is she?

_Stra._ I know not, nor do I wish to know.

_Bar._ And your children?

_Stra._ I left them at a small town hard by.

_Bar._ But why did you not keep your children with you? They would have
amused you in many a dreary hour.

_Stra._ Amused me! Oh, yes! while their likeness to their mother would
every hour remind me of my past happiness! No. For three years I have
never seen them. I hate that any human creature should be near me, young
or old! Had not ridiculous habits made a servant necessary, I should
long since have discharged him; though he is not the worst among the
bad.

_Bar._ Such too often are the consequences of great alliances.
Therefore, Charles, I have resolved to take a wife from a lower rank of
life.

_Stra._ You marry!--Ha! ha! ha!

_Bar._ You shall see her. She is in the house where you are expected.
Come with me.

_Stra._ What! I mix again with the world!

_Bar._ To do a generous action without requiring thanks is noble and
praise-worthy. But so obstinately to avoid those thanks, as to make the
kindness a burden, is affectation.

_Stra._ Leave me! leave me! Every one tries to form a circle, of which
he may be the centre. As long as there remains a bird in these woods to
greet the rising sun with its melody, I shall court no other society.

_Bar._ Do as you please to-morrow; but give me your company this
evening.

_Stra._ [_Resolutely._] No!

_Bar._ Not though it were in your power, by this single visit, to secure
the happiness of your friend for life?

_Stra._ [_Starting._] Ha! then I must--But how?--

_Bar._ You shall sue in my behalf to Mrs. Haller--You have the talent of
persuasion.

_Stra._ I! my dear Steinfort!

_Bar._ The happiness or misery of your friend depends upon it. I'll
contrive that you shall speak to her alone. Will you?

_Stra._ I will; but upon one condition.

_Bar._ Name it.

_Stra._ That you allow me to be gone to-morrow, and not endeavour to
detain me.

_Bar._ Go! Whither?

_Stra._ No matter! Promise this, or I will not come.

_Bar._ Well, I do promise. Come.

_Stra._ I have directions to give my servant.

_Bar._ In half an hour then we shall expect you. Remember, you have
given your word.

_Stra._ I have. [_Exit BARON.--The STRANGER walks up and down,
thoughtful and melancholy._]--Francis!

     _Enter FRANCIS._

_Fra._ Sir!

_Stra._ Why are you out of the way?

_Fran._ Sir, I came when I heard you call.

_Stra._ I shall leave this place to-morrow.

_Fra._ With all my heart.

_Stra._ Perhaps to go into another land.

_Fra._ With all my heart again.

_Stra._ Perhaps into another quarter of the globe.

_Fra._ With all my heart still. Into which quarter?

_Stra._ Wherever Heaven directs! Away! away! from Europe! From this
cultivated moral lazaret! Do you hear, Francis? To-morrow early.

_Fra._ Very well.                                              [_Going._

_Stra._ Come here, come here first, I have an errand for you. Hire that
carriage in the village; drive to the town hard by; you may be back by
sun-set. I shall give you a letter to a widow who lives there. With her
you will find two children. They are mine.

_Fra._ [_Astonished._] Your children, sir!

_Stra._ Take them, and bring them hither.

_Fra._ Your children, sir!

_Stra._ Yes, mine! Is it so very inconceivable?

_Fra._ That I should have been three years in your service, and never
have heard them mentioned, is somewhat strange.

_Stra._ Pshaw!

_Fra._ You have been married then?

_Stra._ Go, and prepare for our journey.

_Fra._ That I can do in five minutes.                          [_Going._

_Stra._ I shall come and write the letter directly.

_Fra._ Very well, sir.                                          [_Exit._

_Stra._ Yes, I'll take them with me. I'll accustom myself to the sight
of them. The innocents! they shall not be poisoned by the refinements of
society. Rather let them hunt their daily sustenance upon some desert
island with their bow and arrow; or creep, like torpid Hottentots, into
a corner, and stare at each other. Better to do nothing than to do evil.
Fool that I was, to be prevailed upon once more to exhibit myself among
these apes! What a ridiculous figure shall I be! and in the capacity of
a suitor too! Pshaw! he cannot be serious! 'Tis but a friendly artifice
to draw me from my solitude. Why did I promise him? Yes, my sufferings
have been many; and, to oblige a friend, why should I hesitate to add
another painful hour to the wretched calendar of my life! I'll go. I'll
go.                                                             [_Exit._

