

Minnie's flat, as the one-floor resident apartments were then being
called, was in a part of West Van Buren Street inhabited by families of
labourers and clerks, men who had come, and were still coming, with the
rush of population pouring in at the rate of 50,000 a year. It was on
the third floor, the front windows looking down into the street, where,
at night, the lights of grocery stores were shining and children were
playing. To Carrie, the sound of the little bells upon the horse-cars,
as they tinkled in and out of hearing, was as pleasing as it was novel.
She gazed into the lighted street when Minnie brought her into the front
room, and wondered at the sounds, the movement, the murmur of the vast
city which stretched for miles and miles in every direction.

Mrs. Hanson, after the first greetings were over, gave Carrie the baby
and proceeded to get supper. Her husband asked a few questions and sat
down to read the evening paper. He was a silent man, American born, of a
Swede father, and now employed as a cleaner of refrigerator cars at the
stock-yards. To him the presence or absence of his wife's sister was a
matter of indifference. Her personal appearance did not affect him one
way or the other. His one observation to the point was concerning the
chances of work in Chicago.

"It's a big place," he said. "You can get in somewhere in a few days.
Everybody does."

It had been tacitly understood beforehand that she was to get work and
pay her board. He was of a clean, saving disposition, and had already
paid a number of monthly instalments on two lots far out on the West
Side. His ambition was some day to build a house on them.

In the interval which marked the preparation of the meal Carrie found
time to study the flat. She had some slight gift of observation and that
sense, so rich in every woman--intuition.

She felt the drag of a lean and narrow life. The walls of the rooms were
discordantly papered. The floors were covered with matting and the hall
laid with a thin rag carpet. One could see that the furniture was of
that poor, hurriedly patched together quality sold by the instalment
houses.

She sat with Minnie, in the kitchen, holding the baby until it began
to cry. Then she walked and sang to it, until Hanson, disturbed in his
reading, came and took it. A pleasant side to his nature came out here.
He was patient. One could see that he was very much wrapped up in his
offspring.

"Now, now," he said, walking. "There, there," and there was a certain
Swedish accent noticeable in his voice.

"You'll want to see the city first, won't you?" said Minnie, when they
were eating. "Well, we'll go out Sunday and see Lincoln Park."

Carrie noticed that Hanson had said nothing to this. He seemed to be
thinking of something else.

"Well," she said, "I think I'll look around tomorrow. I've got Friday
and Saturday, and it won't be any trouble. Which way is the business
part?"

Minnie began to explain, but her husband took this part of the
conversation to himself.

"It's that way," he said, pointing east. "That's east." Then he went off
into the longest speech he had yet indulged in, concerning the lay of
Chicago. "You'd better look in those big manufacturing houses along
Franklin Street and just the other side of the river," he concluded.
"Lots of girls work there. You could get home easy, too. It isn't very
far."

Carrie nodded and asked her sister about the neighbourhood. The latter
talked in a subdued tone, telling the little she knew about it, while
Hanson concerned himself with the baby. Finally he jumped up and handed
the child to his wife.

"I've got to get up early in the morning, so I'll go to bed," and off
he went, disappearing into the dark little bedroom off the hall, for the
night.

"He works way down at the stock-yards," explained Minnie, "so he's got
to get up at half-past five."

"What time do you get up to get breakfast?" asked Carrie.

"At about twenty minutes of five."

Together they finished the labour of the day, Carrie washing the dishes
while Minnie undressed the baby and put it to bed. Minnie's manner was
one of trained industry, and Carrie could see that it was a steady round
of toil with her.

She began to see that her relations with Drouet would have to be
abandoned. He could not come here. She read from the manner of Hanson,
in the subdued air of Minnie, and, indeed, the whole atmosphere of the
flat, a settled opposition to anything save a conservative round of
toil. If Hanson sat every evening in the front room and read his paper,
if he went to bed at nine, and Minnie a little later, what would
they expect of her? She saw that she would first need to get work and
establish herself on a paying basis before she could think of having
company of any sort. Her little flirtation with Drouet seemed now an
extraordinary thing.

"No," she said to herself, "he can't come here."

She asked Minnie for ink and paper, which were upon the mantel in
the dining-room, and when the latter had gone to bed at ten, got out
Drouet's card and wrote him.

"I cannot have you call on me here. You will have to wait until you hear
from me again. My sister's place is so small."

She troubled herself over what else to put in the letter. She wanted
to make some reference to their relations upon the train, but was too
timid. She concluded by thanking him for his kindness in a crude way,
then puzzled over the formality of signing her name, and finally decided
upon the severe, winding up with a "Very truly," which she subsequently
changed to "Sincerely." She scaled and addressed the letter, and going
in the front room, the alcove of which contained her bed, drew the one
small rocking-chair up to the open window, and sat looking out upon
the night and streets in silent wonder. Finally, wearied by her own
reflections, she began to grow dull in her chair, and feeling the need
of sleep, arranged her clothing for the night and went to bed.

When she awoke at eight the next morning, Hanson had gone. Her sister
was busy in the dining-room, which was also the sitting-room, sewing.
She worked, after dressing, to arrange a little breakfast for herself,
and then advised with Minnie as to which way to look. The latter had
changed considerably since Carrie had seen her. She was now a thin,
though rugged, woman of twenty-seven, with ideas of life coloured by her
husband's, and fast hardening into narrower conceptions of pleasure and
duty than had ever been hers in a thoroughly circumscribed youth. She
had invited Carrie, not because she longed for her presence, but because
the latter was dissatisfied at home, and could probably get work and pay
her board here. She was pleased to see her in a way but reflected her
husband's point of view in the matter of work. Anything was good enough
so long as it paid--say, five dollars a week to begin with. A shop girl
was the destiny prefigured for the newcomer. She would get in one of the
great shops and do well enough until--well, until something happened.
Neither of them knew exactly what. They did not figure on promotion.
They did not exactly count on marriage. Things would go on, though, in a
dim kind of way until the better thing would eventuate, and Carrie
would be rewarded for coming and toiling in the city. It was under such
auspicious circumstances that she started out this morning to look for
work.

Before following her in her round of seeking, let us look at the
sphere in which her future was to lie. In 1889 Chicago had the peculiar
qualifications of growth which made such adventuresome pilgrimages even
on the part of young girls plausible. Its many and growing commercial
opportunities gave it widespread fame, which made of it a giant
magnet, drawing to itself, from all quarters, the hopeful and the
hopeless--those who had their fortune yet to make and those whose
fortunes and affairs had reached a disastrous climax elsewhere. It was
a city of over 500,000, with the ambition, the daring, the activity of
a metropolis of a million. Its streets and houses were already scattered
over an area of seventy-five square miles. Its population was not so
much thriving upon established commerce as upon the industries which
prepared for the arrival of others. The sound of the hammer engaged upon
the erection of new structures was everywhere heard. Great industries
were moving in. The huge railroad corporations which had long before
recognised the prospects of the place had seized upon vast tracts of
land for transfer and shipping purposes. Street-car lines had been
extended far out into the open country in anticipation of rapid growth.
The city had laid miles and miles of streets and sewers through regions
where, perhaps, one solitary house stood out alone--a pioneer of the
populous ways to be. There were regions open to the sweeping winds and
rain, which were yet lighted throughout the night with long, blinking
lines of gas-lamps, fluttering in the wind. Narrow board walks extended
out, passing here a house, and there a store, at far intervals,
eventually ending on the open prairie.

In the central portion was the vast wholesale and shopping district,
to which the uninformed seeker for work usually drifted. It was a
characteristic of Chicago then, and one not generally shared by other
cities, that individual firms of any pretension occupied individual
buildings. The presence of ample ground made this possible. It gave an
imposing appearance to most of the wholesale houses, whose offices were
upon the ground floor and in plain view of the street. The large plates
of window glass, now so common, were then rapidly coming into use, and
gave to the ground floor offices a distinguished and prosperous look.
The casual wanderer could see as he passed a polished array of
office fixtures, much frosted glass, clerks hard at work, and genteel
businessmen in "nobby" suits and clean linen lounging about or sitting
in groups. Polished brass or nickel signs at the square stone entrances
announced the firm and the nature of the business in rather neat and
reserved terms. The entire metropolitan centre possessed a high and
mighty air calculated to overawe and abash the common applicant, and to
make the gulf between poverty and success seem both wide and deep.

Into this important commercial region the timid Carrie went. She walked
east along Van Buren Street through a region of lessening importance,
until it deteriorated into a mass of shanties and coal-yards, and
finally verged upon the river. She walked bravely forward, led by
an honest desire to find employment and delayed at every step by the
interest of the unfolding scene, and a sense of helplessness amid so
much evidence of power and force which she did not understand. These
vast buildings, what were they? These strange energies and huge
interests, for what purposes were they there? She could have understood
the meaning of a little stone-cutter's yard at Columbia City, carving
little pieces of marble for individual use, but when the yards of some
huge stone corporation came into view, filled with spur tracks and flat
cars, transpierced by docks from the river and traversed overhead by
immense trundling cranes of wood and steel, it lost all significance in
her little world.

It was so with the vast railroad yards, with the crowded array of
vessels she saw at the river, and the huge factories over the way,
lining the water's edge. Through the open windows she could see the
figures of men and women in working aprons, moving busily about. The
great streets were wall-lined mysteries to her; the vast offices,
strange mazes which concerned far-off individuals of importance. She
could only think of people connected with them as counting money,
dressing magnificently, and riding in carriages. What they dealt in,
how they laboured, to what end it all came, she had only the vaguest
conception. It was all wonderful, all vast, all far removed, and she
sank in spirit inwardly and fluttered feebly at the heart as she thought
of entering any one of these mighty concerns and asking for something to
do--something that she could do--anything.




Once across the river and into the wholesale district, she glanced about
her for some likely door at which to apply. As she contemplated the wide
windows and imposing signs, she became conscious of being gazed upon
and understood for what she was--a wage-seeker. She had never done this
thing before, and lacked courage. To avoid a certain indefinable shame
she felt at being caught spying about for a position, she quickened her
steps and assumed an air of indifference supposedly common to one upon
an errand. In this way she passed many manufacturing and wholesale
houses without once glancing in. At last, after several blocks of
walking, she felt that this would not do, and began to look about again,
though without relaxing her pace. A little way on she saw a great door
which, for some reason, attracted her attention. It was ornamented by a
small brass sign, and seemed to be the entrance to a vast hive of six
or seven floors. "Perhaps," she thought, "they may want some one,"
and crossed over to enter. When she came within a score of feet of the
desired goal, she saw through the window a young man in a grey checked
suit. That he had anything to do with the concern, she could not tell,
but because he happened to be looking in her direction her weakening
heart misgave her and she hurried by, too overcome with shame to enter.
Over the way stood a great six-story structure, labelled Storm and King,
which she viewed with rising hope. It was a wholesale dry goods concern
and employed women. She could see them moving about now and then upon
the upper floors. This place she decided to enter, no matter what. She
crossed over and walked directly toward the entrance. As she did so,
two men came out and paused in the door. A telegraph messenger in
blue dashed past her and up the few steps that led to the entrance and
disappeared. Several pedestrians out of the hurrying throng which filled
the sidewalks passed about her as she paused, hesitating. She looked
helplessly around, and then, seeing herself observed, retreated. It was
too difficult a task. She could not go past them.

So severe a defeat told sadly upon her nerves. Her feet carried her
mechanically forward, every foot of her progress being a satisfactory
portion of a flight which she gladly made. Block after block passed by.
Upon streetlamps at the various corners she read names such as Madison,
Monroe, La Salle, Clark, Dearborn, State, and still she went, her feet
beginning to tire upon the broad stone flagging. She was pleased in part
that the streets were bright and clean. The morning sun, shining down
with steadily increasing warmth, made the shady side of the streets
pleasantly cool. She looked at the blue sky overhead with more
realisation of its charm than had ever come to her before.

Her cowardice began to trouble her in a way. She turned back, resolving
to hunt up Storm and King and enter. On the way, she encountered a great
wholesale shoe company, through the broad plate windows of which she saw
an enclosed executive department, hidden by frosted glass. Without
this enclosure, but just within the street entrance, sat a grey-haired
gentleman at a small table, with a large open ledger before him. She
walked by this institution several times hesitating, but, finding
herself unobserved, faltered past the screen door and stood humble
waiting.

"Well, young lady," observed the old gentleman, looking at her somewhat
kindly, "what is it you wish?"

"I am, that is, do you--I mean, do you need any help?" she stammered.

"Not just at present," he answered smiling. "Not just at present. Come
in some time next week. Occasionally we need some one."

She received the answer in silence and backed awkwardly out. The
pleasant nature of her reception rather astonished her. She had expected
that it would be more difficult, that something cold and harsh would be
said--she knew not what. That she had not been put to shame and made to
feel her unfortunate position, seemed remarkable.

Somewhat encouraged, she ventured into another large structure. It was a
clothing company, and more people were in evidence--well-dressed men of
forty and more, surrounded by brass railings.

An office boy approached her.

"Who is it you wish to see?" he asked.

"I want to see the manager," she said. He ran away and spoke to one of
a group of three men who were conferring together. One of these came
towards her.

"Well?" he said coldly. The greeting drove all courage from her at once.

"Do you need any help?" she stammered.

"No," he replied abruptly, and turned upon his heel.

She went foolishly out, the office boy deferentially swinging the door
for her, and gladly sank into the obscuring crowd. It was a severe
setback to her recently pleased mental state.

Now she walked quite aimlessly for a time, turning here and there,
seeing one great company after another, but finding no courage to
prosecute her single inquiry. High noon came, and with it hunger. She
hunted out an unassuming restaurant and entered, but was disturbed to
find that the prices were exorbitant for the size of her purse. A bowl
of soup was all that she could afford, and, with this quickly eaten,
she went out again. It restored her strength somewhat and made her
moderately bold to pursue the search.

In walking a few blocks to fix upon some probable place, she again
encountered the firm of Storm and King, and this time managed to get in.
Some gentlemen were conferring close at hand, but took no notice of her.
She was left standing, gazing nervously upon the floor. When the limit
of her distress had been nearly reached, she was beckoned to by a man at
one of the many desks within the near-by railing.

"Who is it you wish to see?" he required.

"Why, any one, if you please," she answered. "I am looking for something
to do."

"Oh, you want to see Mr. McManus," he returned. "Sit down," and he
pointed to a chair against the neighbouring wall. He went on leisurely
writing, until after a time a short, stout gentleman came in from the
street.

"Mr. McManus," called the man at the desk, "this young woman wants to
see you."

The short gentleman turned about towards Carrie, and she arose and came
forward.

"What can I do for you, miss?" he inquired, surveying her curiously.

"I want to know if I can get a position," she inquired.

"As what?" he asked.

"Not as anything in particular," she faltered.

"Have you ever had any experience in the wholesale dry goods business?"
he questioned.

"No, sir," she replied.

"Are you a stenographer or typewriter?"

"No, sir." "Well, we haven't anything here," he said. "We employ only
experienced help."

She began to step backward toward the door, when something about her
plaintive face attracted him.

"Have you ever worked at anything before?" he inquired.

"No, sir," she said.

"Well, now, it's hardly possible that you would get anything to do in a
wholesale house of this kind. Have you tried the department stores?"

She acknowledged that she had not.

"Well, if I were you," he said, looking at her rather genially, "I would
try the department stores. They often need young women as clerks."

"Thank you," she said, her whole nature relieved by this spark of
friendly interest.

"Yes," he said, as she moved toward the door, "you try the department
stores," and off he went.

At that time the department store was in its earliest form of successful
operation, and there were not many. The first three in the United
States, established about 1884, were in Chicago. Carrie was familiar
with the names of several through the advertisements in the "Daily
News," and now proceeded to seek them. The words of Mr. McManus had
somehow managed to restore her courage, which had fallen low, and she
dared to hope that this new line would offer her something. Some time
she spent in wandering up and down, thinking to encounter the buildings
by chance, so readily is the mind, bent upon prosecuting a hard but
needful errand, eased by that self-deception which the semblance of
search, without the reality, gives. At last she inquired of a police
officer, and was directed to proceed "two blocks up," where she would
find "The Fair."

The nature of these vast retail combinations, should they ever
permanently disappear, will form an interesting chapter in the
commercial history of our nation. Such a flowering out of a modest trade
principle the world had never witnessed up to that time. They were along
the line of the most effective retail organisation, with hundreds of
stores coordinated into one and laid out upon the most imposing and
economic basis. They were handsome, bustling, successful affairs, with
a host of clerks and a swarm of patrons. Carrie passed along the busy
aisles, much affected by the remarkable displays of trinkets, dress
goods, stationery, and jewelry. Each separate counter was a show place
of dazzling interest and attraction. She could not help feeling the
claim of each trinket and valuable upon her personally, and yet she did
not stop. There was nothing there which she could not have used--nothing
which she did not long to own. The dainty slippers and stockings,
the delicately frilled skirts and petticoats, the laces, ribbons,
hair-combs, purses, all touched her with individual desire, and she felt
keenly the fact that not any of these things were in the range of her
purchase. She was a work-seeker, an outcast without employment, one whom
the average employee could tell at a glance was poor and in need of a
situation.

It must not be thought that any one could have mistaken her for a
nervous, sensitive, high-strung nature, cast unduly upon a cold,
calculating, and unpoetic world. Such certainly she was not. But women
are peculiarly sensitive to their adornment.

Not only did Carrie feel the drag of desire for all which was new and
pleasing in apparel for women, but she noticed too, with a touch at the
heart, the fine ladies who elbowed and ignored her, brushing past in
utter disregard of her presence, themselves eagerly enlisted in the
materials which the store contained. Carrie was not familiar with the
appearance of her more fortunate sisters of the city. Neither had she
before known the nature and appearance of the shop girls with whom she
now compared poorly. They were pretty in the main, some even handsome,
with an air of independence and indifference which added, in the case of
the more favoured, a certain piquancy. Their clothes were neat, in many
instances fine, and wherever she encountered the eye of one it was only
to recognise in it a keen analysis of her own position--her individual
shortcomings of dress and that shadow of manner which she thought must
hang about her and make clear to all who and what she was. A flame of
envy lighted in her heart. She realised in a dim way how much the city
held--wealth, fashion, ease--every adornment for women, and she longed
for dress and beauty with a whole heart.

On the second floor were the managerial offices, to which, after some
inquiry, she was now directed. There she found other girls ahead of
her, applicants like herself, but with more of that self-satisfied
and independent air which experience of the city lends; girls
who scrutinised her in a painful manner. After a wait of perhaps
three-quarters of an hour, she was called in turn.

"Now," said a sharp, quick-mannered Jew, who was sitting at a roll-top
desk near the window, "have you ever worked in any other store?"

"No, sir," said Carrie.

"Oh, you haven't," he said, eyeing her keenly.

"No, sir," she replied.

"Well, we prefer young women just now with some experience. I guess we
can't use you."

Carrie stood waiting a moment, hardly certain whether the interview had
terminated.

"Don't wait!" he exclaimed. "Remember we are very busy here."

Carrie began to move quickly to the door.

"Hold on," he said, calling her back. "Give me your name and address. We
want girls occasionally."

When she had gotten safely into the street, she could scarcely restrain
the tears. It was not so much the particular rebuff which she had just
experienced, but the whole abashing trend of the day. She was tired and
nervous. She abandoned the thought of appealing to the other department
stores and now wandered on, feeling a certain safety and relief in
mingling with the crowd.

In her indifferent wandering she turned into Jackson Street, not far
from the river, and was keeping her way along the south side of that
imposing thoroughfare, when a piece of wrapping paper, written on with
marking ink and tacked up on the door, attracted her attention. It
read, "Girls wanted--wrappers & stitchers." She hesitated a moment, then
entered.

The firm of Speigelheim & Co., makers of boys' caps, occupied one floor
of the building, fifty feet in width and some eighty feet in depth.
It was a place rather dingily lighted, the darkest portions having
incandescent lights, filled with machines and work benches. At the
latter laboured quite a company of girls and some men. The former were
drabby-looking creatures, stained in face with oil and dust, clad in
thin, shapeless, cotton dresses and shod with more or less worn shoes.
Many of them had their sleeves rolled up, revealing bare arms, and in
some cases, owing to the heat, their dresses were open at the neck. They
were a fair type of nearly the lowest order of shop-girls--careless,
slouchy, and more or less pale from confinement. They were not timid,
however; were rich in curiosity, and strong in daring and slang.

Carrie looked about her, very much disturbed and quite sure that she did
not want to work here. Aside from making her uncomfortable by sidelong
glances, no one paid her the least attention. She waited until the whole
department was aware of her presence. Then some word was sent around,
and a foreman, in an apron and shirt sleeves, the latter rolled up to
his shoulders, approached.

"Do you want to see me?" he asked.

"Do you need any help?" said Carrie, already learning directness of
address.

"Do you know how to stitch caps?" he returned.

"No, sir," she replied.

"Have you ever had any experience at this kind of work?" he inquired.

She answered that she had not.

"Well," said the foreman, scratching his ear meditatively, "we do need
a stitcher. We like experienced help, though. We've hardly got time
to break people in." He paused and looked away out of the window. "We
might, though, put you at finishing," he concluded reflectively.

"How much do you pay a week?" ventured Carrie, emboldened by a certain
softness in the man's manner and his simplicity of address.

"Three and a half," he answered.

"Oh," she was about to exclaim, but checked herself and allowed her
thoughts to die without expression.

"We're not exactly in need of anybody," he went on vaguely, looking her
over as one would a package. "You can come on Monday morning, though,"
he added, "and I'll put you to work."

"Thank you," said Carrie weakly.

"If you come, bring an apron," he added.

He walked away and left her standing by the elevator, never so much as
inquiring her name.

While the appearance of the shop and the announcement of the price paid
per week operated very much as a blow to Carrie's fancy, the fact that
work of any kind was offered after so rude a round of experience was
gratifying. She could not begin to believe that she would take the
place, modest as her aspirations were. She had been used to better than
that. Her mere experience and the free out-of-door life of the country
caused her nature to revolt at such confinement. Dirt had never been her
share. Her sister's flat was clean. This place was grimy and low, the
girls were careless and hardened. They must be bad-minded and hearted,
she imagined. Still, a place had been offered her. Surely Chicago
was not so bad if she could find one place in one day. She might find
another and better later.

Her subsequent experiences were not of a reassuring nature, however.
From all the more pleasing or imposing places she was turned away
abruptly with the most chilling formality. In others where she applied
only the experienced were required. She met with painful rebuffs, the
most trying of which had been in a manufacturing cloak house, where she
had gone to the fourth floor to inquire.

"No, no," said the foreman, a rough, heavily built individual, who
looked after a miserably lighted workshop, "we don't want any one. Don't
come here."

With the wane of the afternoon went her hopes, her courage, and her
strength. She had been astonishingly persistent. So earnest an effort
was well deserving of a better reward. On every hand, to her fatigued
senses, the great business portion grew larger, harder, more stolid in
its indifference. It seemed as if it was all closed to her, that the
struggle was too fierce for her to hope to do anything at all. Men and
women hurried by in long, shifting lines. She felt the flow of the
tide of effort and interest--felt her own helplessness without quite
realising the wisp on the tide that she was. She cast about vainly
for some possible place to apply, but found no door which she had
the courage to enter. It would be the same thing all over. The old
humiliation of her plea, rewarded by curt denial. Sick at heart and in
body, she turned to the west, the direction of Minnie's flat, which she
had now fixed in mind, and began that wearisome, baffled retreat which
the seeker for employment at nightfall too often makes. In passing
through Fifth Avenue, south towards Van Buren Street, where she intended
to take a car, she passed the door of a large wholesale shoe house,
through the plate-glass windows of which she could see a middle-aged
gentleman sitting at a small desk. One of those forlorn impulses which
often grow out of a fixed sense of defeat, the last sprouting of a
baffled and uprooted growth of ideas, seized upon her. She walked
deliberately through the door and up to the gentleman, who looked at her
weary face with partially awakened interest.

"What is it?" he said.

"Can you give me something to do?" said Carrie.

"Now, I really don't know," he said kindly. "What kind of work is it you
want--you're not a typewriter, are you?"

"Oh, no," answered Carrie.

"Well, we only employ book-keepers and typewriters here. You might
go around to the side and inquire upstairs. They did want some help
upstairs a few days ago. Ask for Mr. Brown."

She hastened around to the side entrance and was taken up by the
elevator to the fourth floor.

"Call Mr. Brown, Willie," said the elevator man to a boy near by.

Willie went off and presently returned with the information that Mr.
Brown said she should sit down and that he would be around in a little
while.

It was a portion of the stock room which gave no idea of the general
character of the place, and Carrie could form no opinion of the nature
of the work.

"So you want something to do," said Mr. Brown, after he inquired
concerning the nature of her errand. "Have you ever been employed in a
shoe factory before?"

"No, sir," said Carrie.

"What is your name?" he inquired, and being informed, "Well, I don't
know as I have anything for you. Would you work for four and a half a
week?"

Carrie was too worn by defeat not to feel that it was considerable. She
had not expected that he would offer her less than six. She acquiesced,
however, and he took her name and address.

"Well," he said, finally, "you report here at eight o'clock Monday
morning. I think I can find something for you to do."

He left her revived by the possibilities, sure that she had found
something at last. Instantly the blood crept warmly over her body.
Her nervous tension relaxed. She walked out into the busy street and
discovered a new atmosphere. Behold, the throng was moving with a
lightsome step. She noticed that men and women were smiling. Scraps of
conversation and notes of laughter floated to her. The air was light.
People were already pouring out of the buildings, their labour ended
for the day. She noticed that they were pleased, and thoughts of her
sister's home and the meal that would be awaiting her quickened her
steps. She hurried on, tired perhaps, but no longer weary of foot. What
would not Minnie say! Ah, the long winter in Chicago--the lights, the
crowd, the amusement! This was a great, pleasing metropolis after all.
Her new firm was a goodly institution. Its windows were of huge plate
glass. She could probably do well there. Thoughts of Drouet returned--of
the things he had told her. She now felt that life was better, that it
was livelier, sprightlier. She boarded a car in the best of spirits,
feeling her blood still flowing pleasantly. She would live in Chicago,
her mind kept saying to itself. She would have a better time than she
had ever had before--she would be happy.




For the next two days Carrie indulged in the most high-flown
speculations.

Her fancy plunged recklessly into privileges and amusements which would
have been much more becoming had she been cradled a child of fortune.
With ready will and quick mental selection she scattered her meagre
four-fifty per week with a swift and graceful hand. Indeed, as she sat
in her rocking-chair these several evenings before going to bed and
looked out upon the pleasantly lighted street, this money cleared for
its prospective possessor the way to every joy and every bauble which
the heart of woman may desire. "I will have a fine time," she thought.

Her sister Minnie knew nothing of these rather wild cerebrations, though
they exhausted the markets of delight. She was too busy scrubbing the
kitchen woodwork and calculating the purchasing power of eighty cents
for Sunday's dinner. When Carrie had returned home, flushed with her
first success and ready, for all her weariness, to discuss the now
interesting events which led up to her achievement, the former had
merely smiled approvingly and inquired whether she would have to spend
any of it for car fare. This consideration had not entered in before,
and it did not now for long affect the glow of Carrie's enthusiasm.
Disposed as she then was to calculate upon that vague basis which
allows the subtraction of one sum from another without any perceptible
diminution, she was happy.

When Hanson came home at seven o'clock, he was inclined to be a little
crusty--his usual demeanour before supper. This never showed so much in
anything he said as in a certain solemnity of countenance and the
silent manner in which he slopped about. He had a pair of yellow carpet
slippers which he enjoyed wearing, and these he would immediately
substitute for his solid pair of shoes. This, and washing his face with
the aid of common washing soap until it glowed a shiny red, constituted
his only preparation for his evening meal. He would then get his evening
paper and read in silence.

For a young man, this was rather a morbid turn of character, and so
affected Carrie. Indeed, it affected the entire atmosphere of the flat,
as such things are inclined to do, and gave to his wife's mind its
subdued and tactful turn, anxious to avoid taciturn replies. Under the
influence of Carrie's announcement he brightened up somewhat.

"You didn't lose any time, did you?" he remarked, smiling a little.

"No," returned Carrie with a touch of pride.

He asked her one or two more questions and then turned to play with the
baby, leaving the subject until it was brought up again by Minnie at the
table.

Carrie, however, was not to be reduced to the common level of
observation which prevailed in the flat.

"It seems to be such a large company," she said, at one place.

"Great big plate-glass windows and lots of clerks. The man I saw said
they hired ever so many people."

"It's not very hard to get work now," put in Hanson, "if you look
right."

Minnie, under the warming influence of Carrie's good spirits and her
husband's somewhat conversational mood, began to tell Carrie of some
of the well-known things to see--things the enjoyment of which cost
nothing.

"You'd like to see Michigan Avenue. There are such fine houses. It is
such a fine street."

"Where is H. R. Jacob's?" interrupted Carrie, mentioning one of the
theatres devoted to melodrama which went by that name at the time.

"Oh, it's not very far from here," answered Minnie. "It's in Halstead
Street, right up here."

"How I'd like to go there. I crossed Halstead Street to-day, didn't I?"

At this there was a slight halt in the natural reply. Thoughts are a
strangely permeating factor. At her suggestion of going to the theatre,
the unspoken shade of disapproval to the doing of those things which
involved the expenditure of money--shades of feeling which arose in the
mind of Hanson and then in Minnie--slightly affected the atmosphere of
the table. Minnie answered "yes," but Carrie could feel that going to
the theatre was poorly advocated here. The subject was put off for a
little while until Hanson, through with his meal, took his paper and
went into the front room.

When they were alone, the two sisters began a somewhat freer
conversation, Carrie interrupting it to hum a little, as they worked at
the dishes.

"I should like to walk up and see Halstead Street, if it isn't too far,"
said Carrie, after a time. "Why don't we go to the theatre to-night?"

"Oh, I don't think Sven would want to go to-night," returned Minnie. "He
has to get up so early."

"He wouldn't mind--he'd enjoy it," said Carrie.

"No, he doesn't go very often," returned Minnie.

"Well, I'd like to go," rejoined Carrie. "Let's you and me go."

Minnie pondered a while, not upon whether she could or would go--for
that point was already negatively settled with her--but upon some means
of diverting the thoughts of her sister to some other topic.

"We'll go some other time," she said at last, finding no ready means of
escape.

Carrie sensed the root of the opposition at once.

"I have some money," she said. "You go with me." Minnie shook her head.

"He could go along," said Carrie.

"No," returned Minnie softly, and rattling the dishes to drown the
conversation. "He wouldn't."

It had been several years since Minnie had seen Carrie, and in that time
the latter's character had developed a few shades. Naturally timid in
all things that related to her own advancement, and especially so when
without power or resource, her craving for pleasure was so strong that
it was the one stay of her nature. She would speak for that when silent
on all else.

"Ask him," she pleaded softly.

Minnie was thinking of the resource which Carrie's board would add. It
would pay the rent and would make the subject of expenditure a little
less difficult to talk about with her husband. But if Carrie was going
to think of running around in the beginning there would be a hitch
somewhere. Unless Carrie submitted to a solemn round of industry and saw
the need of hard work without longing for play, how was her coming to
the city to profit them? These thoughts were not those of a cold,
hard nature at all. They were the serious reflections of a mind
which invariably adjusted itself, without much complaining, to such
surroundings as its industry could make for it.

At last she yielded enough to ask Hanson. It was a half-hearted
procedure without a shade of desire on her part.

"Carrie wants us to go to the theatre," she said, looking in upon her
husband. Hanson looked up from his paper, and they exchanged a mild
look, which said as plainly as anything: "This isn't what we expected."

"I don't care to go," he returned. "What does she want to see?"

"H. R. Jacob's," said Minnie.

He looked down at his paper and shook his head negatively.

When Carrie saw how they looked upon her proposition, she gained a still
clearer feeling of their way of life. It weighed on her, but took no
definite form of opposition.

"I think I'll go down and stand at the foot of the stairs," she said,
after a time.

Minnie made no objection to this, and Carrie put on her hat and went
below.

"Where has Carrie gone?" asked Hanson, coming back into the dining-room
when he heard the door close.

"She said she was going down to the foot of the stairs," answered
Minnie. "I guess she just wants to look out a while."

"She oughtn't to be thinking about spending her money on theatres
already, do you think?" he said.

"She just feels a little curious, I guess," ventured Minnie. "Everything
is so new."

"I don't know," said Hanson, and went over to the baby, his forehead
slightly wrinkled.

He was thinking of a full career of vanity and wastefulness which a
young girl might indulge in, and wondering how Carrie could contemplate
such a course when she had so little, as yet, with which to do.

On Saturday Carrie went out by herself--first toward the river, which
interested her, and then back along Jackson Street, which was then lined
by the pretty houses and fine lawns which subsequently caused it to
be made into a boulevard. She was struck with the evidences of wealth,
although there was, perhaps, not a person on the street worth more than
a hundred thousand dollars. She was glad to be out of the flat, because
already she felt that it was a narrow, humdrum place, and that
interest and joy lay elsewhere. Her thoughts now were of a more
liberal character, and she punctuated them with speculations as to the
whereabouts of Drouet. She was not sure but that he might call anyhow
Monday night, and, while she felt a little disturbed at the possibility,
there was, nevertheless, just the shade of a wish that he would.

On Monday she arose early and prepared to go to work. She dressed
herself in a worn shirt-waist of dotted blue percale, a skirt of
light-brown serge rather faded, and a small straw hat which she had worn
all summer at Columbia City. Her shoes were old, and her necktie was in
that crumpled, flattened state which time and much wearing impart.
She made a very average looking shop-girl with the exception of her
features. These were slightly more even than common, and gave her a
sweet, reserved, and pleasing appearance.

It is no easy thing to get up early in the morning when one is used to
sleeping until seven and eight, as Carrie had been at home. She gained
some inkling of the character of Hanson's life when, half asleep, she
looked out into the dining-room at six o'clock and saw him silently
finishing his breakfast. By the time she was dressed he was gone, and
she, Minnie, and the baby ate together, the latter being just old enough
to sit in a high chair and disturb the dishes with a spoon. Her spirits
were greatly subdued now when the fact of entering upon strange and
untried duties confronted her. Only the ashes of all her fine fancies
were remaining--ashes still concealing, nevertheless, a few red embers
of hope. So subdued was she by her weakening nerves, that she ate quite
in silence going over imaginary conceptions of the character of the
shoe company, the nature of the work, her employer's attitude. She was
vaguely feeling that she would come in contact with the great owners,
that her work would be where grave, stylishly dressed men occasionally
look on.

"Well, good luck," said Minnie, when she was ready to go. They had
agreed it was best to walk, that morning at least, to see if she could
do it every day--sixty cents a week for car fare being quite an item
under the circumstances.

"I'll tell you how it goes to-night," said Carrie.

Once in the sunlit street, with labourers tramping by in either
direction, the horse-cars passing crowded to the rails with the small
clerks and floor help in the great wholesale houses, and men and women
generally coming out of doors and passing about the neighbourhood,
Carrie felt slightly reassured. In the sunshine of the morning, beneath
the wide, blue heavens, with a fresh wind astir, what fears, except
the most desperate, can find a harbourage? In the night, or the gloomy
chambers of the day, fears and misgivings wax strong, but out in the
sunlight there is, for a time, cessation even of the terror of death.

Carrie went straight forward until she crossed the river, and then
turned into Fifth Avenue. The thoroughfare, in this part, was like a
walled canon of brown stone and dark red brick. The big windows looked
shiny and clean. Trucks were rumbling in increasing numbers; men and
women, girls and boys were moving onward in all directions. She met
girls of her own age, who looked at her as if with contempt for her
diffidence. She wondered at the magnitude of this life and at the
importance of knowing much in order to do anything in it at all. Dread
at her own inefficiency crept upon her. She would not know how, she
would not be quick enough. Had not all the other places refused her
because she did not know something or other? She would be scolded,
abused, ignominiously discharged.

It was with weak knees and a slight catch in her breathing that she came
up to the great shoe company at Adams and Fifth Avenue and entered the
elevator. When she stepped out on the fourth floor there was no one at
hand, only great aisles of boxes piled to the ceiling. She stood, very
much frightened, awaiting some one.

Presently Mr. Brown came up. He did not seem to recognise her.

"What is it you want?" he inquired.

Carrie's heart sank.

"You said I should come this morning to see about work--"

"Oh," he interrupted. "Um--yes. What is your name?"

"Carrie Meeber."

"Yes," said he. "You come with me."

He led the way through dark, box-lined aisles which had the smell of
new shoes, until they came to an iron door which opened into the factory
proper. There was a large, low-ceiled room, with clacking, rattling
machines at which men in white shirt sleeves and blue gingham aprons
were working. She followed him diffidently through the clattering
automatons, keeping her eyes straight before her, and flushing slightly.
They crossed to a far corner and took an elevator to the sixth floor.
Out of the array of machines and benches, Mr. Brown signalled a foreman.

"This is the girl," he said, and turning to Carrie, "You go with him."
He then returned, and Carrie followed her new superior to a little desk
in a corner, which he used as a kind of official centre.

"You've never worked at anything like this before, have you?" he
questioned, rather sternly.

"No, sir," she answered.

He seemed rather annoyed at having to bother with such help, but put
down her name and then led her across to where a line of girls occupied
stools in front of clacking machines. On the shoulder of one of the
girls who was punching eye-holes in one piece of the upper, by the aid
of the machine, he put his hand.

"You," he said, "show this girl how to do what you're doing. When you
get through, come to me."

The girl so addressed rose promptly and gave Carrie her place.

"It isn't hard to do," she said, bending over. "You just take this so,
fasten it with this clamp, and start the machine."

She suited action to word, fastened the piece of leather, which was
eventually to form the right half of the upper of a man's shoe, by
little adjustable clamps, and pushed a small steel rod at the side of
the machine. The latter jumped to the task of punching, with sharp,
snapping clicks, cutting circular bits of leather out of the side of the
upper, leaving the holes which were to hold the laces. After observing a
few times, the girl let her work at it alone. Seeing that it was fairly
well done, she went away.

The pieces of leather came from the girl at the machine to her right,
and were passed on to the girl at her left. Carrie saw at once that an
average speed was necessary or the work would pile up on her and all
those below would be delayed. She had no time to look about, and bent
anxiously to her task. The girls at her left and right realised her
predicament and feelings, and, in a way, tried to aid her, as much as
they dared, by working slower.

At this task she laboured incessantly for some time, finding relief from
her own nervous fears and imaginings in the humdrum, mechanical movement
of the machine. She felt, as the minutes passed, that the room was not
very light. It had a thick odour of fresh leather, but that did not
worry her. She felt the eyes of the other help upon her, and troubled
lest she was not working fast enough.

Once, when she was fumbling at the little clamp, having made a slight
error in setting in the leather, a great hand appeared before her eyes
and fastened the clamp for her. It was the foreman. Her heart thumped so
that she could scarcely see to go on.

"Start your machine," he said, "start your machine. Don't keep the line
waiting."

This recovered her sufficiently and she went excitedly on, hardly
breathing until the shadow moved away from behind her. Then she heaved a
great breath.

As the morning wore on the room became hotter. She felt the need of a
breath of fresh air and a drink of water, but did not venture to stir.
The stool she sat on was without a back or foot-rest, and she began to
feel uncomfortable. She found, after a time, that her back was beginning
to ache. She twisted and turned from one position to another slightly
different, but it did not ease her for long. She was beginning to weary.

"Stand up, why don't you?" said the girl at her right, without any form
of introduction. "They won't care."

Carrie looked at her gratefully. "I guess I will," she said.

She stood up from her stool and worked that way for a while, but it was
a more difficult position. Her neck and shoulders ached in bending over.

The spirit of the place impressed itself on her in a rough way. She did
not venture to look around, but above the clack of the machine she could
hear an occasional remark. She could also note a thing or two out of the
side of her eye.

"Did you see Harry last night?" said the girl at her left, addressing
her neighbour.

"No."

"You ought to have seen the tie he had on. Gee, but he was a mark."

"S-s-t," said the other girl, bending over her work. The first,
silenced, instantly assumed a solemn face. The foreman passed slowly
along, eyeing each worker distinctly. The moment he was gone, the
conversation was resumed again.

"Say," began the girl at her left, "what jeh think he said?"

"I don't know."

"He said he saw us with Eddie Harris at Martin's last night." "No!" They
both giggled.

A youth with tan-coloured hair, that needed clipping very badly, came
shuffling along between the machines, bearing a basket of leather
findings under his left arm, and pressed against his stomach. When near
Carrie, he stretched out his right hand and gripped one girl under the
arm.

"Aw, let me go," she exclaimed angrily. "Duffer."

He only grinned broadly in return.

"Rubber!" he called back as she looked after him. There was nothing of
the gallant in him.

Carrie at last could scarcely sit still. Her legs began to tire and she
wanted to get up and stretch. Would noon never come? It seemed as if she
had worked an entire day. She was not hungry at all, but weak, and her
eyes were tired, straining at the one point where the eye-punch came
down. The girl at the right noticed her squirmings and felt sorry for
her. She was concentrating herself too thoroughly--what she did really
required less mental and physical strain. There was nothing to be done,
however. The halves of the uppers came piling steadily down. Her hands
began to ache at the wrists and then in the fingers, and towards the
last she seemed one mass of dull, complaining muscles, fixed in an
eternal position and performing a single mechanical movement which
became more and more distasteful, until as last it was absolutely
nauseating. When she was wondering whether the strain would ever cease,
a dull-sounding bell clanged somewhere down an elevator shaft, and the
end came. In an instant there was a buzz of action and conversation. All
the girls instantly left their stools and hurried away in an adjoining
room, men passed through, coming from some department which opened on
the right. The whirling wheels began to sing in a steadily modifying
key, until at last they died away in a low buzz. There was an audible
stillness, in which the common voice sounded strange.

Carrie got up and sought her lunch box. She was stiff, a little dizzy,
and very thirsty. On the way to the small space portioned off by wood,
where all the wraps and lunches were kept, she encountered the foreman,
who stared at her hard.

"Well," he said, "did you get along all right?"

"I think so," she replied, very respectfully.

"Um," he replied, for want of something better, and walked on.

Under better material conditions, this kind of work would not have been
so bad, but the new socialism which involves pleasant working conditions
for employees had not then taken hold upon manufacturing companies.

The place smelled of the oil of the machines and the new leather--a
combination which, added to the stale odours of the building, was not
pleasant even in cold weather. The floor, though regularly swept every
evening, presented a littered surface. Not the slightest provision
had been made for the comfort of the employees, the idea being that
something was gained by giving them as little and making the work
as hard and unremunerative as possible. What we know of foot-rests,
swivel-back chairs, dining-rooms for the girls, clean aprons and curling
irons supplied free, and a decent cloak room, were unthought of. The
washrooms were disagreeable, crude, if not foul places, and the whole
atmosphere was sordid.

Carrie looked about her, after she had drunk a tinful of water from a
bucket in one corner, for a place to sit and eat. The other girls had
ranged themselves about the windows or the work-benches of those of the
men who had gone out. She saw no place which did not hold a couple or a
group of girls, and being too timid to think of intruding herself, she
sought out her machine and, seated upon her stool, opened her lunch on
her lap. There she sat listening to the chatter and comment about
her. It was, for the most part, silly and graced by the current slang.
Several of the men in the room exchanged compliments with the girls at
long range.

"Say, Kitty," called one to a girl who was doing a waltz step in a few
feet of space near one of the windows, "are you going to the ball with
me?"

"Look out, Kitty," called another, "you'll jar your back hair."

"Go on, Rubber," was her only comment.

As Carrie listened to this and much more of similar familiar badinage
among the men and girls, she instinctively withdrew into herself. She
was not used to this type, and felt that there was something hard and
low about it all. She feared that the young boys about would address
such remarks to her--boys who, beside Drouet, seemed uncouth and
ridiculous. She made the average feminine distinction between clothes,
putting worth, goodness, and distinction in a dress suit, and leaving
all the unlovely qualities and those beneath notice in overalls and
jumper.

She was glad when the short half hour was over and the wheels began to
whirr again. Though wearied, she would be inconspicuous. This illusion
ended when another young man passed along the aisle and poked her
indifferently in the ribs with his thumb. She turned about, indignation
leaping to her eyes, but he had gone on and only once turned to grin.
She found it difficult to conquer an inclination to cry.

The girl next her noticed her state of mind. "Don't you mind," she said.
"He's too fresh."

Carrie said nothing, but bent over her work. She felt as though she
could hardly endure such a life. Her idea of work had been so entirely
different. All during the long afternoon she thought of the city outside
and its imposing show, crowds, and fine buildings. Columbia City and the
better side of her home life came back. By three o'clock she was sure it
must be six, and by four it seemed as if they had forgotten to note the
hour and were letting all work overtime. The foreman became a true ogre,
prowling constantly about, keeping her tied down to her miserable task.
What she heard of the conversation about her only made her feel sure
that she did not want to make friends with any of these. When six
o'clock came she hurried eagerly away, her arms aching and her limbs
stiff from sitting in one position.

As she passed out along the hall after getting her hat, a young machine
hand, attracted by her looks, made bold to jest with her.

"Say, Maggie," he called, "if you wait, I'll walk with you."

It was thrown so straight in her direction that she knew who was meant,
but never turned to look.

In the crowded elevator, another dusty, toil-stained youth tried to make
an impression on her by leering in her face.

One young man, waiting on the walk outside for the appearance of
another, grinned at her as she passed.

"Ain't going my way, are you?" he called jocosely.

Carrie turned her face to the west with a subdued heart. As she turned
the corner, she saw through the great shiny window the small desk at
which she had applied. There were the crowds, hurrying with the same
buzz and energy-yielding enthusiasm. She felt a slight relief, but it
was only at her escape. She felt ashamed in the face of better dressed
girls who went by. She felt as though she should be better served, and
her heart revolted.


